--- Page 1 ---
‘Data Centers |

Data Center Qeﬁnition. Data Center Demands (Adding, Méving, Deleting Resources, Failure
Recovery, Multitenancy, Traffic Engineering and Path Efficiency), Tunneling Technologies for the

Data Center, SDN Use Cases in the Data Center, SDN Solutions for the Data Center Network -
VLANs - EVPN - VxLAN - NVGRE = ‘

Contents

3.1 . Definition

3.2  Data Center Architecture : Key Design Components
3.3  The 4 Tiers of Data Centers |

34 Data Centre Demands

3.5  Tunneling Technologies for the Data Center

8.6 Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN)

3.7  Ethernet VPN (EVPN)

3.8 SDN Use Cases

3.9  Review Questions with Answers

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 2 ---
e, e

infrastruc g&veshmdac&ubappliuﬂmm& ata. Ther
andard ib help with planning, building and maintaining data ¢
fadliﬁa to guarantee the data is highly accessible and safe.

A data centre is a physical location where computer systems are securely

being used to store and exchange data for client systems to process. In a data ¢

~ these computer systems frequently contain servers, data storage sYstems,
gear and security systems.

« A simple analogy to a video streaming service might be helpful to understmd
data centre operates. The real video data is kept on a server that is actually ho
data centre when a user wishes to play an online video on a streaming se:

video will be requested to be collected from the data centre by your laptop or .‘; 7

(the client system) and once fetched, it will be played on the device. f

l

4
1

Types of Data Center

Data centres come in a variety of sizes, from a single small server room to larg
’ clusters of buildings spread across a large area, but they all have one thing in common
They are vital business assets where businesses frequently invest in and implement the
most recent developments in data centre networking, computing and storag
technologies. :
The contemporary data centre has changed from being a place where an on-premises
infrastructure was housed to one that links on-premises systems with cot
infrastructures, where networks, applications and workloads are virtualized across na
private and public clouds.
* Managed service data centers offer aspects such as data storage, computing a
other services as a third party, serving customers directly.
* Cloud data centers are distributed and are sometimes offered to customets
the help of a third-party managed service provider.

¢ Enterprise data centers are typically constructed and used by a single organiz&
for their own internal purposes. These are common among tech giants.

* Colocation data centers function as a kind of rental property where the space 2
resources of a data center are made available to the people willing to rent it. |

-

i . - TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ™ - an up-thrust for knowledge A

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 3 ---
ats that driv mwmmmmmm erations to the s

applici or Mﬂuﬂ!"‘ tarde 3o, sonrly Las emmm .

1 Sen ors : These are computers that can handle large amounts of data and

e *apﬁmﬁons They have high - performance CPUs, RAM and occasionally GPUs.

~ single data centre rack is made up of many server modules. A solitary deh/ei} or
rack may be devoted to a job, application, or particular client, depending on the use
case. In general, hundreds of servers working on diverse activities and apphcatlons
are housed in contemporary data centers.

2. Storage devices : Storage systems, such as Hard Disc Drives (HDDs), Solid - State
Drives (SSDs), or traditional robotic tape drives, take care of the servers' storage
needs. In addition to providing simple access to end users and disaster recovery in
the event of cyber attacks or natural catastrophes, these units store business -
critical data and programmes with numerous backups.

3. Infrastructure for networks and communications : This component hnks end-user

locations to the servers, storage systems and related data centre services. It mostly
. consists of switches, routers, ADCs and endless cables that enable information
move around the data centre.

4. Security : This is the last element. It consists of components that are in charge of
preserving the security of the data and applications stored in data centres. The
solutions might include complete network and application security solutions as
well as firewalls and encryption.

Data Center Architecture Components

Compute, storage and network are the three main categories of components found in
data centres. But in a contemporary DC, these elements merely represent the tip of the
iceberg, To fulfill the service level agreements of a corporate data centre, support
infrastructure is crucial.

* Data Center Computing

The heart of a data centre is its servers. Applications executed on servers may employ

physical, virtual, distributed, containerized, or edge computing model processing and

memory, which is dispersed among remote nodes. Processors that are best suited for
the job must be used in data centres; for example, general-purpose CPUs may not be

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 4 ---
;

combi ‘” -mmm **** ss
Mmmmmmﬂmgelsethatmso&wm - defined.

' Data Center Networks
To link servers to one other and to the outside world, dahcmbermtwork
- such as cables, switches, routers and firewalls are used. Whendengned
correctly, they can handle large amounts of traffic without sacrificing performan
~ Core switches at the data center's edge link it to the Internet and a middle aggr at
hyerco:u\ectstheoorelayertoﬂ\eacoesslayer,whichiswheretheserversam ocateg
(p—ptamses networks now have the agility and scalability of cloud networks t
Iphndvahonshkehyperscale network secunty and software - defined networkmg,

Data Center Support Infrastructure '
A strong and dependable support infrastructure made up of power subsystems,
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS), backup generators, ventilation and cooling

equipment, fire suppression systems and building security systems protects data centres,
which are considered to be a key asset.

Data centre design, building and maintenance are aided by industry stand:
provided by groups like the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) a
Uptime Institute. The Uptime Institute, for example, describes these four tiers :
Tier|: Basic capacity must include a UPS,

Tierll:  Redundant capacity and adds redundant power and cooling.

g g Concurrently maintainable and ensures that any component can be taken out®
service without affecting production,

TierIV: Fault tolerant, allowing

any production capacity to be insulated from any Kin

1’

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 5 ---
ur*"”' v measures that supn : a facility su
Jescribec 'Td"éﬁar Mmeygrwm
, netwox-ks data centre firewalls, data access eamols; gyt
morary counterpart Web Apphcation and API Protection (WAKH stems
Wﬂy configured. Additionally, it's critical that you comprehend Hﬁe
ures the cloud service provider or data storage provider uses for their own DC
pefore using them. Make the biggest security investment you can to protect your data

The 4 Tiers of Data Centers
An organisation must take into account a variety of elements while building up a data
centre in order to choose the best infrastructure, mcludmg its industry, location, finances
and the urgency of data access. To assist with this, a set of standards for data centre
design and execution were established in 2005 by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) and the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA). These
standards assess data centres based on factors including
e Uptime,
¢ Investment,
* Redundancy and

Fault tolerance level

into four separate groups or tiers.

1. Basic

* Only the most basic infrastructure, such as a single power'distribution channel,
specialised cooling equipment and UPS to servers, is carried by Tier 1 data centres.

* Office complexes or enterprises that do not require quick access to data should use
Tier 1 data centres.

¢ Due to the absence of gear designed for redundancy, these facilities also have the
lowest server hosting costs.

* These facilities are intended to provide an uptime of 99.671 % annually with the
barest amount of redundancy, such as backups. They will also need to be shut
down for repairs and maintenance.

.

.l ' TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 6 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 7 ---
| ilure Recovery ﬂawd!:db
Anything that endangers the Operations of a company is a failure. Each
munmty planning procedure should be integrated with your Faﬂurd‘!@dov
ﬂm To ensure overall process, technology and application preparedness, deﬁnﬁd |
recovery point and recovery time objectives must be established.

With a business continuity and failure recovery plan in place, one can lessen the effects

of extreme weather events and rise to the ‘occasion in the event that your data centre
sustains structural damage, water, wind, or fire.

Maintaining technical operations and speedy business operétions restor‘ation are the
objectives of a failure recovery strategy. '
Five effective and efficient steps to data center failure recovery are :
¢ Understanding the impact of a failure on your organization as a whole
» Pre-determining failure recovery team members
» Creating failure recovery plan
¢ Determining Recovery Time Objective (RTO) and Recovery Point Ob]ectlve (RPO)

 Testing disaster recovery plan

Multitenancy

Colocation data centers, commonly referred to as Multi-Tenant Data Centres (MTDCs),
are places where businesses can rent space to host their data. MTDCs offer the area and
networking tools needed to link a company to service providers for a reasonable fee.
Businesses can hire a variety of items to suit their needs, from a server rack to a fully
functional module. The business advantages of a data centre are made avallable through
the scalability of consumption without the high cost.

Advantages of a multi - tenant data center

¢ Implementation and shared infrastructure efficiency

Cost control and operational efficiency
* Outsourcing infrastructure needs
The true agility of a multi - tenant data center

- an up-thrust for knowledge

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 8 ---
,,,,,,,

- Many: witches, hosts and virtual machines
~  Large number of component failures
-~ Virtual Machine (VM) migration

o Traffic characteristics
- High traffic volume and dense traffic matrix
- Volatile, unpredictable traffic patterns

e Performance requirements
- Delay - sensitive applications
- Resource isolation between tenants

Traffic Engineering Opportunities
o Efficient network .
- Low propagation delay and high capacity
* Specialized topology
- Fattree, Clos network, etc.
- Opportunities for hierarchical addressing
~* Control over both network and hosts
= Joint optimization of routing and server placement
- Can move network functionality into the end host
* Flexible movement of workload '
= Services replicated at multiple servers and data centers
= Virtual Machine (VM) migration

Tunneling Technologies for the Data Center

Mlhere are a several number of tunneling technologies which are used in the data center
Andsome of are data center - oriented tunneling technologies predate SDN

- an up-thrust brknmhdyo |

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 9 ---
o 3 :
d .
- Buysey  jouun yopms
S 68.7 = Uod £q _uw.—whm_.“hhwum J0 di pue DY 1
. : 3 _ ) NYIXA Ajjeoiwe
. peojAed pue 82inos : JSULIIP JIOMIBN dan (e JsaQ 7 20in0S
~ puejsapisoy [eulbuo Wa-vZ

{

ey

ALY \
o \.
Z

\\&\Q\

SN

7

o
ORI

Fig. 3.5.1 : VXLAN packet format

&y

)
.

Local Area Network(VXLAN)

iy

»

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 10 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 11 ---
. - : T

Source / Dest ~ Network identifier Original host dest and
MAC and IP of source and payload
switch tunnel ' ,

endpoints

Fig. 3.5.2 : NVGRE packet format

The format of an NVGRE packet is displayed in Fig. 3.5.2 Similar to VXLAN, the outer
header includes the MACand IP addresses necessary to deliver a unicast packet to the
destination switch, which serves as the end point of a virtual tunnel. Recall that UDP was
the IP protocol used for VXLAN. The IP protocol value for NVGRE is 0x2F, which
denotes GRE, a distinct IP protocol that belongs to the same category as TCP or UDP. As
a result, neither source nor destination TCP nor UDP ports are shown in the diagram.
Foﬂowfng the outer header is the NVGRE header, which provides an NVGRE Subnet
Identifier with a length of 24 bits that is adequate for around 16 million networks.

3. Stateless Transpbrt Tunneling (STT)

A more recent innovation in the realm of tunneling methods for network virtualization
is Stateless Transport Tunneling (STT). Nicira served as its principal sponsor at first. STT
has a number of key properties, including :

¢ STT utilizes MAC-in-IP tunneling.

e The general idea of a virtual network exists in STT, but is enclosed in a more
general identifier called a Context ID.

o STT packets are unicast between tunnel end points, utilizing TCP in the stateless
manner associated with TSO. This means that it does not use the typical TCP
windowing scheme, which requires state for TCP synchronization and flow
control.

e STT context IDs are 64 bits, allowing for a much larger number of virtual networks
and a broader range of service models. |

* STT attempts to achieve performance gains over NVGRE and VXLAN by
19veraging the TCP Segmentation Offload(TSO) found in the Network Interface
Cards(NICs) of many servers. TSO is a mechanism implemented on server NICs
which allows large packets of data to be sent from the server to the NIC in a single

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 12 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 13 ---
. orks as necessary in the S’l‘T header,, which eqmu,mq @p- "!";1 T anc
| mm a STT Context Identifier of 64 bitsin length that can be partitioned and wtiizec

VA Y Yo eenainevBi f.il‘
mVIrtual Local Area Network (VLAN) ‘ Pawe.
A Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) is a virtualized link that unites various
network nodes and devices from several LANs into a single logical network. ]

XX Types of VLAN

Virtual local area networks are now essential for businesses with intricate networkmg
infrastructures. Organizations need technologies that let them pértition their nétivorks to
boost security, scale them and reduce latency. VLANs allow several LANs and their
associated devices to communicate via wireless internet, whereas LAN is used to link a
group of devices, such as PCs and printers, to a server via cables. The five different forms
of virtual networks are described below : |

e Virtual local area network for management : A smaller network made to assist in
controlling device traffic, application lcgging and monitoring. The increased
network security is the main benefit of adopting this network. By limiting access
and routing all regular traffic to other virtual networks, it can lessen the effects of
broadcast radiation and make the network safer.

¢ Voice virtual local area network : This form of network, which is set up to carry
voice traffic, aids in bandwidth preservation and VoIP quality improvement. It can
be utilised to control traffic produced by VoIP hardware or software, including IP
phones, VoIP endpoints and voice systems. Most of the time, high transmission
priority is provided to this form of network above other network traffic.

¢ Native virtual local area network : A theory used to conventional systems or
hardware that does not allow VLANSs. In order to transport untagged data |
produced by a system or device configured with the native VLAN via switch port, ~ ?_
this network acts as a common identifier on the opposing ends of the trunk links.

* Default virtual local area network : Until they are assigned to other networks, such
as voice or management virtual networks, a default virtual network contains all the

I ' i TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust forknowlcdgo

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 14 ---
& set up to exclusively carry user-generated data. Administrators can - e
wmmkemim‘ey aren't all linked to the same network switch,

"y
[EXE] Advantages of VLAN
VLAN has a number of benefits, including easier administration, better performance

more flexibility and more. .

1. Saves Costs : Workstations or other devices connected to a specific VLAN can |
communicate with one another via switches, doing away with the need for routers to
send and receive data on computer networks from locations outside the virtual LAN,
Due to the enormous external data interchange, routers nﬁght create bottlenecks and
generate security issues. Switches, on the other hand, offer less features than a router
but can communicate with the network's devices and effectively handle the data load.
This set-up and configuration can lower your company's router investment costs and
lower overall network latency. |

2. Simplified administration and enhanced security : Virtual LANs don't need intensive
administrative oversight. You can limit, alter, elimjnéte, update, or adjust access
restrictions and permissions privileges on these networks. You can separate systems
and devices into different LAN segments to guarantee security if you need to grant
access to a certain set of users. Virtual LANs don't require reconfiguration if the
systems, user groups, or devices connected to a particular network are moved. Your
company will be able to save money, time and resources in this way. '

3. Offer greater flexibility : Physical networks are less versatile than virtual LANs. They
are simple to set up, update and assign based on protocol, port and subnet
requirements. You may communicate with your team and exchange data more easily
because these networks don't depend on being close to other devices or on physical
connections like wires and cables.

Ethernet VPN (EVPN)

| EVPN gives big businesses a standardized framework for controlling their campy®
'.'."‘ d"' centre networks. Scale, simplicity, agility and effective Layer 2 and Layer 3

- m connectivity are all supported by EVPN - architecture, which also 1owe®
OpEx(operational expenditure) expenses.

¢

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS © - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 15 ---
¢ s N I ¥ i N | : < L -

, " —Jf"lﬂn’e-[ f o
2a \d Layer 3 connection between e‘ndp'oiﬁts around the v

Benefits of EVPN o VALKV - e

‘ A m advantages of using an EVPN architecture include : | -~
o Programmability makes it simple to automate

« Backwards and forwards compatibility is ensured by its open standards - based
design. hab

e Layer 2 and Layer 3 connection that is efficient and integrateci with control plane -
based learning '

ALULILY 1O PIO
. -

irTiqnsley

 Simple network scalability depehdihg on business requirements

o Get safely isolate traffic via network segmehtation inside and across several
campuses and data centres.

¢ Reduced fault domain improves network dependability.

+ MAC address mobility offers easy but flexible deployment options.

* With loop-free technology, spanning tree protocol is not as necessary (STP)

¢ The network bandwidth is entirely used by active - active redundant connections. |

Understanding EVPN i | |

* In conventional Layer 2 networks, flooding is used to spread reachability information i
in the data plane. In networks using EVPN-VXLAN, this activity is moved to the |
control plane. i ]

* EVPN is a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) extension that enables the network to

convey Layer 2 MAC addresses and Layer 3 IP addresses as endpoint reachability data.

For the endpoint distribution of MAC and IP addresses, this control plane technology

émploys MP-BGP, where MAC addresses are regarded as routes.

o addition, EVPN offers redundancy and multipath forwarding via an. all-active

II“‘lltﬁmming approach. A device or endpoint can establish connections with tVtIO or

More upstream devices and use all available links to forward traffic. Traffic sonpnues

10 4m°."e using the remaining operational links even if a device or link malfunctions.

- an un-thrust for knawledne

 TEAWNIRAL PLRLICATIONS

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 16 ---
in EVPN desnsns By empsuhﬁns trafﬁc and tunneling i
“+ ol """"'* stwork, network overlays are produced. In order to enable u’
'm or subnets that can transcend the underlying physical Layer 3 nety
VXLAN tunneling protocol wraps Layer 2 Ethernet frames in Layer 3 UDP pa
VXLAN tunnel endpoint is the component that encapsulates and decapsulates V
(V'I'm’). Through the use of EVPN, VTEPs may communicate with one ..--:jyl :
regarding the reachability of their endpoints. Tk -

t

EX) SDN Use Cases

~ Software Defined Networking (SDN) has received a lot of interest from scientists a an d
academics over the last several years. It is still an evolvmg technology that will eventually
lead to the software - controlled networking architecture taking the place of the physic '
network design. Typically, it turns out to be a flexible, reasonably affordable and dynamic
option. SDN's complexity enables it to meet applications' high bandwidth requirements.

Despite the hoopla around software defined networking, few real-world applications
can be identified, but that doesn't imply there aren't any. Here are a few SDN use cases
that demonstrate its flexibility and ability to solve certain network issues.

» Hyper - converged storage / converged storage
A design known as converged storage combines storage and computational power info
a single entity. They may be used to build platforms for workloads that are storages
server-, or even hybrid (storage-server)-focused. Several well-known data services
providers are starting to implement SDN while building programmable fabrics
between storage and data centre technologies. The goal is to achieve server and stora '
virtualization agility through the use of virtualization. For instance, Edgenet I
created the Programmable Flow SDN Ecosystem, which builds such a system using

robust and effective switching,
* Video applications

' thf‘ “‘3“‘8 it for their video and collaboration services, the unified j
‘“d border control prowder Networks unveiled a new application for SDN.
- ur lipe mtwork virtuahzaﬁon platform with their session border ol

*'7‘ 'uillovud provideta the luxury of creating capad*}’ for' :

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 17 ---
'
= - i*,' g b, i
v v T K
] - s

using SDN as an enterpmm A f
Wk and best accommodates the dynamic agreements i
ﬂne of work.

o,dmmhon of mobile network services

“Both SDN and NVF, or network functions virtuahzation, have mvaded thenetworks Og

mobile operators. In an effort to assure optimal resource utilization and dynaxme .

l provisioning on the service orchestratlon vendors have started to employ them to set
up their networks more meticulously. Vendors employing the combination of SDN
and NVF now have a lot of advantages, including the ability to provision lead times.

- Companies may now isolate their application logic, which was previously impossible,
which is another crucial factor in choosing SDN-NVF, The design can adapt to the
requirements of the suppliers thanks to effective service orchestration and dynamic
resource consumption. Businesses assert that after adopting the architecture, they have
been able to cut down the lead times a lot and have also reported quicker overall
performance of their platforms

* Data center networks’ scalability

Networks in data centres can also employ SDN to replace their wired infrastructure.
Currently, University of Illinois researchers are attempting to evaluate a new network
that has been established for a data centre using certain SDN switches. The researchers
are able to scale the bandwidth between servers; of course, this might have been done
in another way as well, but only after spending an excessive amount of money on
hardware. There are 13 Pica8 switches installed, totaling about 670 ports. Access
speeds will likely increase significantly if data networks are more often managed by
software since load balancing and capacity scaling will be guaranteed.

m SDN in the Data Center

The need for Software-Defined Networking (SDN) in the data centre is being driven by
Virtualization, More expectations are being placed on the data centre to provide more
flexibility, better performance and higher security as a result of growing demands on IT
*Mployees to support cloud computing services, mobile apps, BYOD and big data
“PPlications, The infrastructure must be provided as a service powered by software,
oiding the need to constantly modify the physical data infrastructure to meet these

5 .

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowladns -

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 18 ---
. ,m'wmyme.m.we nemwk amh‘imturé mw
d@@ngmmneedsy RELL B ' o

_ SDN Strategy to Centralize Management in the Data Center
Using an SDN pohcy to centrahze management in the data center eases

management in a variety of ways : "

1. Automated network provisioning - Creating a programmable network enab]es' u
to automate access to network resources. 'Automated network prov‘isl ing
Network regulations and security protocols may be implemented, as well as
automated provisioning for remote locations and connections, using the SDN.

2. Traffic shaping - You may track and shape network traffic, including assigning

" Quality of Service (QoS) to prioritise certain wide-area network traffic, using APIs
‘that expose the switching and controller fabric. It is also feasible to automate the
management of bandwidth, hop count and circuit usage, transferring backups and
other non-critical data traffic across underused secondary lines. Throughput is
accelerated and becomes more predictable.

3. Real-time monitoring - Centralized performance- monitoring is also made i)ossihk. '
by routing SDN traffic through the data centre. Monitoring performance can assist ;
to increase dependability, improve performance and enable automated failover as
needed to solve latency concerns from distant data centres or cloud resources.

4. Reducing security risks - The SDN can segregate network nodes that could be

~ bringing malware into the company using virus detection and real-time
monitoring. To preserve performance, the SDN might instruct the network to ]
divert traffic around a compromised node or connection point.

|
|
y
|
|
|
|

Use Cases for SDN in the Data Center

In network architecture , as needed to meet any requirement by adding soﬁw?'
controls and automation to manage almost any LAN or WAN asset. Without SDN in
data centre, the following use cases would not be feasible : ‘

* VM cogimunication simplification - Without a software - defined strategy’
managmg large data centres like the hyperscale data centres utilised by AmaZ®
< N\d Google would be very challenging. Virtual Machines (VMs) can commd

2 ,A,_W“h one another using SDN without worrying about the underlying faan- .' ’
IUWQI'S operational costs wl'ule streamhmng VM deployment. ~

rseumcm. PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 19 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 20 ---
S —— —

SDN Programming

TE o v %

- ‘i ’ "
e SrertELCEE T I
. i

“ arn' '
215 4

amming ?PNS : Northbound Application Programming Interface, Current Languages and
, Composition of SDNs - Introduction of Network F unctions Virtualization (NFV) and Software
Networks : Concepts, Implementation and Applications et

Northbound Application Programming Interfacé A ; .;
Current Languages and TooIs....' .............. ..... April-19, Marks 6 :

‘Composition of SDN ’

Network Functions Virtualization }

SDN Implementation

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 21 ---
©+ The usual 'm'wmcrnnm'm* tches and

s Interf:

SDN architecture using Application Programming Intectaces m
resides in between the controller and the application layer in SDN is know
Northbound API. ‘ | | A
Northbound API presents a network abstraction interface to the apphm‘ :
management systeins at the top of the SDN stack.
Northbound API implemented by SDN controllers can be regarded as 2 networ
abstraction interface to applications, easing network programmability, simplifying
control and management tasks and allowing for innovation. In contrast o ¢
Southbound API, the Northbound API is not supported by an accepted standard.
The northbound interface connects SDN applicatiohs to the controller. An application
can request information, such as statistics and incoming connections from the
controller. An application can also send commands to the controller, in order to conirol
the network, such as added or removed flow rules. |
An application is designed for a specific task. Using the information obtained from&
controller, possibly combined with information from other sources, it can make a
informed decision about changing the network.

An example of an application which does all of the above, is a data traffic applicationin
a data center. Fig. 4.1.1 shows schematic overview of a SDN application which
monitors data traffic usage.

A bookkeeping system holds the data traffic limit of a certain user. The application

keeps track of the data usage of this user via the northbound interface. Once it reaches
the limit found in the bookkeeping system, the application can install a rule blocking of
limiting data transfer from and to that user.

Limit reached
- feedback _ =

[
-~

Data traffic Block transfer when
information

limit reached

Flg. 4.1.1 : Schematic overview of a SDN application which monitors data traffic usage

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 22 ---
iy
"- [ {

| 1 i ' '.h

ik =

f nd interface, where OpenFlow is dominant,
northbound interface is implemented in .om._ , O
'" develqpment cycle and lower investment costs than the ;;_-y ]
 which requires specialized hardware. | e
' . While there is no standard, many controllers have chosen to implemez'ft ; “ ST or
- RESTful northbound interface. This ensures decoupling in space between the
~ application and the controller. ' -

19
wak
HC

. With this, the controller has control over what functions it exposés to the SDN

~ applications and its performance will not be affected by them, since applications can i'.

run on a different host.

+ Northbound APIs present an abstraction of network functions with a programmable
interface for applications to consume the network services and configure the network
dynamically. They allow the applications to dictate the behaviour of the network.

« There are two kinds of communications that occur in SDN; one is between a forwarding

plane element and a controller and the next is between the controller, the applications

or business logic.

+ Northbound APIs usually provide a list of vendors related base network functions
which are then used to configure user specific infrastructure and the controller
interprets it into a language that each infrastructure node can understand.

thbound APIs is because external

* The primary reason for the existence of Nor
y wish to extract information and

management systems or network applications ma
control the underlying network and parts of its behaviour.

* They also expose the universal network abstraction data model and functionality
within the controller for use by network applications.

* They are used to facilitate innovation and have effective orchestration of the ne

is required for the alignment of the network to the needs of different appli;aﬁ
they enable maximum utility of the SDN architecture.

* The importance of the Northbound Interface is that it simplifies tht? operation of the
control plane, by providing a high-level API between the application ?ayer and the
controller, This makes it easier for the development of network functionalities. |

* The Northbound Interfaces Working Group has the goal of buildipg anvinterface

“@pable of dealing with different Jevels of abstraction and across a wide range of

_ domains, |

—

twork. It
ons and

" TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 23 ---
he imple ements bhofNorthbound APIs uses various approaches Prirycts 1 f
i'  Define portable low-level application interfaces that make the southbour
~ look like device drivers. . 'z.f i

2. Create Ad-Hoc Northbound API that are specific to a controller These have the oir

own purpose and specific definitions. | (B8R

- 3. Translate application requirements into lower level service requests. e ﬂ
Propose a general control platform based on Linux and abstractions such as the _
virtual file system.

5. Allow network administrators to define module speaﬁc allocatlons and access
control policies.
6. Use SDN programming language |
* The northbound interface is implemented in software; therefore, it can have a more
rapid development cycle and lower investment costs than the southbound mterface ;
which requires specialized hardware.
* REST API : A Representational State Transfer (REST) API or an API that is RESTful is
neither a protocol, language nor an established standard. It is basically constraints that
an API must follow in order to be a RESTful API.

Current Languages and Tools

* Network devices have always been considered as configurable black boxes until the
emergence of Software-Defined Networking (SDN).

* SDN enables the networks to be programmed according to the user requirements;
furthermore, it allows the network to be easily modified to suit transient demands.

* However, how do we program the network ? SDN - comphant switches offer a low -
level interface that makes programming error-prone.

* The controllers provide application programming interfaces, but still low-level, limited
and inflexible. High - level languages have the potential to be a better alternative to
program the network.

There exist several SDN programming languages implementing different sets of
-4 | functionalities and focusing on solving various issues. ' 4

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 24 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 25 ---
"+ OpenDaylight has a large amount of backing from different companies.
Ini ' , ;vnght uses the Apache Karaf framework as a container fo_r'i'tg"‘
m““ﬁﬁ;gtﬁe ka;'&f console, features can be easily turned on or off. -'
e "“éoi\'ﬁgﬁfé'ﬁon and logging are also handled by karaf. |

_ . K;réf has a number of components available for use, most important a web seryer

used by the northbound interface of OpenDaylight.

5. NetKAT
* NetKAT is a network language for SDN programming that has a solid
mathematical, semantic foundation. It is similar to NetCore and Pyretic although
neither language can provide potentially infinite behaviours. '
* NetKAT applies its complete equational theory and provides syntactic techniques }
for the same. Hence, its applications in a network include checking reachability,
isolating traffic between programs through non - interference properties that it
provides, as well as compilation algorithms correctness.
* Its design includes a mathematical structure called Kleene algebra with tests (KAT)
that provides a solid semantic foundation for NetKAT. ; |

6. Mininet

* Mininet is a network emulator capable of creating virtual networks with hundreds
of hosts and switches on a single computer. It is based on Linux process -
virtualization to run the nodes in the OS kernel.

* As of Linux version 2.2.26 there is support for network namespaces, a lightweight
virtualization feature and Mininet takes advantage of it. This means that each
process can have a separate network interface, routing table and Address
Resolution Protocol table. Then, it is possible to have links between hosts and
switches (processes), in order to build a virtual network.

* With a single command, Mininet can create a realistic virtual network on any type
of machine (Virtual Machine (VM), cloud-hosted, or native). Therefore, it PI‘OVides ]

- an inexpensive solution and streamlined development running in line with .
Production networks. b " e ;

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 26 ---
PP TR

- .\,:;,,v/,‘. p.

created, running on asingle laptop, ',
. Ammmm a process (or group of pr | origér has
all the host system’s native network mteﬂhoes.« "' re the ened virtu
Ethernet interfaces, which are connected to other cmw through a virtu
switch. L
q'Minlmt Oonnectn a host and a switch using a v1rtua1 Ethemek (\reth) lir (,I}ﬁ
" link is analogousto a wire connecting twovn:tualmterfaces _— ._*.._... ;
o Features of Mininet : 1402 1o nolfisogmed ﬂ N
i. Fast prototyping for new networkmg protocols. Y ot 178
ii. Simplified testing for complex topologles without the need of buymg
expensive hardware. :
iii. Realistic execution as it runs real code on the Umx and Lmux kemels
iv. Open source environment backed by a large commumty contnbutmg
_extensive documentation.

¢ Basic commands are as follows : _
» After logging into the server, start mininet by typing : :
> sudo mn -c (enter the password for the computer) ; : ol
This will clean up the mininet framework and reset 1t to the 1mt1al state. Start mmmet |
again but without cleaning it up by :
> sudo mn
¢ We should get a mininet prompt as follows : mininet>
» To list the topology type :
mininet> net
s Display Mininet CLI commands :
mininet> help
* Display nodes :
mininet> nodes

7. Floodlight
' Floodlight is a Java-based OpenFlow controller. It was developed by Big Switch

~ Networks and used in their commercial switches. Then, opened to the commumhy
under an Apache license, where it is actively developed. A :

' TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up—lhrusf br knowb&go

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 27 ---
: o ;..mmmth&apphmﬁms through the NBIL
1. What is Mininet ? Explain basic commands of Mininet.
Composition of SDN

1. Flow Table

- d) Instructions : To modify the action set or pipeline processing. .
€) Tlmeouts Maximum amount of time or idle time before ﬂow is expired’bﬂ :

SPPU: /

Flow tables are the fundamental data structures in an SDN device. These flow
tables allow the device to evaluate incoming packets and take the appropmu
action based on the contents of the packet that has just been received. |
Flow table resides on the network device and consists of a series of flow entries and
the actions to perform when a packet matching that flow arrives at the device.
When the SDN device receives a packet, it consults its flow tables in search df a‘
match. i
These flow tables had been constructed previously when the contro]ter
downloaded appropriate flow rules to the device. If the SDN device finds a matcf\'

it takes the appropriate configured action, which usually entails forwardmg
packet. v *
If it does not find a match, the switch can either drop the packet or pass it to ﬂ'ﬁ
controller, depending on the version of OpenFlow and the conﬁgurahon of ﬂ\ﬁ
switch.

i ¢‘I'- 3
Each flow table entry contains :

a) Match fields : To match against packets. These consist of the ingress port e ,j
packet headers and optionally metadata specified by a previous table.

b) Priority : Matching precedence of the flow entry.

¢) Counters: Updated when packets are matched.

I

#e ‘7‘

. k‘ =
TMIML MIIQNS -an Unnm MM

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 28 ---
] ~ -
na riow cal

processing pa ". QR e G
 Sf \--"-" t _ NSWNch.. A i ; Lie Ve v .., o Ve .'"’-'H’F;E ' ."i'ri'-; 4
o Implementation of SDN devices in software is the simplest means of cr
'SDN device, because the flow tables, flow entries, and match fields involve
easily mapped to general software data structures, such as sorted arrayyarld
tables. | - . i
¢ Implementations in software are likely to be slower and less efficient than those |

implemented in hardware, since they do not benefit from any hardware
acceleration. .

* Software SDN device implementations are most often found in software-based v ol
network devices, such as the hypervisors of a virtualization system. PR

3. Hardware SDN Devices
» Network devices utilize specialized hardware designed to facilitate the inspection
of incoming packets and the subsequent decisions that follow based on the packet-
matching operation. ‘_
e hardware includes the layer two and layer three forwarding tables, usually
implemented using Content - Addressable Memories (CAMs) and Ternary Content

- Addressable Memories (TCAMs).

m Network Functions Virtualization
¢ Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) is a way to virtualize network services, such
as routers, firewalls and load balancers, that have traditionally been run on proprietary
hardware. : ,
¢ These services are packaged as Virtual Machines (VMs) on commodity hardware,
which allows service providers to run their network on standard servers instead of
proprietary ones. ;
* NFV architecture consists of : 3
a) Virtualized Network Functions (VNFs) are software apphcatxons that deliver -
network functions such as file sharing, directory services and IP configuration.
b) Network Functions Virtualization infrastructure (NFVi) consists of the ;
infrastructure components, compute, storage, networking on a platform to support
software, such as a hypervisor like KVM or a container management platform,

needed to run network apps.
TEGHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-tfrustfor knowledge

&
.

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 29 ---
aliz "" m mtwoxfk abstracﬁon, but how meggm net

rates network forwardmg functions from network control ﬁmet:ons vit L t

niaeahng a network that is centrally manageable and programmable

ﬁ abstracts network functions from hardware. NFV supports SDN by prowdmg

infrastructure on which SDN software can run. '*4 h

» NFV and SDN can be used together, depending on what you want to accomplish and -
 both use commodity hardware. With 'NFV ‘and SDN, you can create a network
architecture that is more flexible, programmable and uses resources efficiently.

« NFV decouples network functions from dedicated hardware devices and moves them
to general-purpose servers, which allows multiple functions to be consolidated onto a
single physical server with well-defined open interfaces to Management and
Orchestration systems. :

e This virtualization of network functions reduces dependency on dedicated hardware
appliances for network operators and allows for improved scalability and

customization across the entire network. Different from a virtualized network, NFV
seeks to offload network functions only, rather than the entire network.

* Separating network functions from hardware yields numerous benefits for the netwalki !
operator, which include :

a) Reduced space needed for network hardware
b) Reduce network power consumption

¢) Reduced network maintenance costs

d) Easier network upgrades

e) Longer life cycles for network hardware

f) Reduced maintenance and hardware costs

* Fig. 4.4.1 shows a simplified view of the ETSI NFV architecture.

O TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 30 ---
Fig. 4.4.1 : Simplified view of the ETSI NFV architecture

o The major components of the architecture include the NFV infrastructure (NFVI),
VNFs, VNF managers and management and orchestration (MANO). Some of the
critical goals of an open NFV architecture include :

a) Decomposition of physical network elements into virtualized network ﬁmcho,?;
(VNFs) to allow operators to choose the best implementations from a range
vendors.

b) Portability of VNFs to different hardware platforms and hypervisors.

¢) Rapid software - based service delivery.

d) Standard, open interfaces for improved mteroperablhty in multi - vendor NFV

solutions.
e) Use of low - cost, commercial off - the - shelf (COTS) hardware

* Management and Orchestration (MANO) provides the overarching management and
orchestration of the VNFs in the NFV architecture.

¢ MANO instantiates the network services through the automation, provisioning and
coordination of workflows to the VIM and VNF Managers that instantiate the VNFs
and overlay networking service chains. MANO connects the NFV architecture with the

existing OSS / BSS.
. SDN Implementation |
1. Define a use case. SDN is a broad, multi-faceted technology. Whether it fits in your

organization depends on the problem user want to solve. o3

2. Assemble a cross - functional team. SDNisasilo-breahngteduwtog;
lmplementmg it correctly requires a well - rounded team with a broad range ofskin;

and a comprehensive approach.
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledae

L

s -

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 31 ---
m aqmdmgdeploymm Bvanfyuurstm .
'!'1 I"‘ ,mﬁmsmeﬁmlstepbdoreexpmdingitmym
Slowly increase your project’s footprint and gain maturity before fully e
deployment.
« There are a number of programming languages for SDN and the majority of\M
be applied in OpenFlow networks. OpenFlow is the first and only standa;
interface between the control and the mfrastructure layer that allows forwarding m&.
in SDN.
e As the OpenFlow nétwork can be programmed on the data flow level, it provides
~ higher - granular control that enables fast adaptahon to network apphcatlons and user

requn'ements

Applications of Software-Defined Networking

1. Data centers : The SDN architecture is targeted at Infrastructure-based networks and
data centers fall under this category. Data centers operate large-scale networks,
which places policy enforcement and traffic management at a critical level.

2. Enterprise networks : Generally, enterprises run large networks while possessing
rigid security and performance requirements. For networks in an enterprise
environment to function adequately, the SDN model can be adopted to enforce
policies and services that would optimize network performance as well as enhance-
network management.

3. Optical networks : Extending SDN to handle data traffic as ﬂows enhances the
integration of multiple network technologies.

4. Bandwidth management : With the help of SDN applications, operators can use
bandwidth management to ensure the end users to receive online video watching
and optimal browsing experiences. : Lh

5. Content availability : SDN applications can also check the availability of the content
in the content servers before routing requests to servers. A content - routing E

- application will provide intelligence on its availability along with enabling dISCO"e'y;
of content in the content servers, 1
oad

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 32 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 33 ---
t 'I'he virtual maclﬂnes use a |
e and procahukell’aﬂwandng and routing .
tion of communication services from dedicated hardware, like
3 nms and ﬁrewalls separaﬁon means that network operations will e
services dynamically and while not putting in new hardware. Deploying netwc "R
~ elements with network functions virtualization takes hours rather than months like
! with andient networking. Also, the virtualized services will run on less costly, SM' ;
servers rather than proprietary hardware.
« Additional reasons to use network functions virtualization include :
1. Pay-as-you-go : NFV models will cut back prices as a result of businesses PaYmS
just for what they have.
2. Fewer appliances : NFV runs on virtual machines rather than physical machines,
fewer appliances are necessary and operational prices are lower. :
3. Scalability : Scaling the spec with virtual machines is quicker and easier and it
doesn't need getting extra hardware.

Working of Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Essentially, network functions virtualization replaces the practicality provided by
individual hardware networking parts. This implies that virtual machines run software
packages that accomplish identical networking functions because of ancient hardware.
Load equalization, routing and firewall security area unit all performed by software
package rather than hardware parts. A hypervisor or software-defined networking
controller permits network engineers to program all of the various segments of the virtual
network and even modify the provisioning of the network. IT managers will put together
numerous aspects of the network practicality through one pane of glass, in minutes.

Benefits of Network Functions Virtualization

Several service providers feel that the advantages of network functions virtualization
outweigh the risks, With ancient hardware-based networks, network managers ought t0
purchase dedicated hardware devices and manually tack together and connect them O
make a network. This can be long and needs speciahzed networking experience.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS * - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 34 ---
AISLYY V.

»..,‘»'I

_:tonﬂgunﬁoﬁ wmﬁagenm 1 ta ckoter it Vh AT ABSV Ot
work practicality is modified or another on dmwm amm
mnmg on virtual machines that are a unit simply provisioned and rﬂm nes

- BB Risks of Network Functions Virtualization ) -

J‘

"'|—.|.|. ¥ .'

|
| NFV makes a network a lot of responsive and versahle, and simply ascendable It wﬂl |
accelerate time to promote and considerably cut back instrumentation prices. However,
there are security risks and network functions virtualization security issues have verified
to be a hurdle for wide adoption among telecommunications suppliers. Here the risks of

xmplementmg network functions virtualization that service supphers have to be
compelled to consider :

* Physical security controls do not seem to be effective : Virtualizing network parts.
will increase their vulnerability to new types of attacks compared to physical
instrumentation that is secured in a very knowledge center.

Malware is tough to isolate and contain : It is easier for malware to travel among

virtual parts that are a unit all ruhning off of 1 virtual machine than between

hardware parts which will be isolated or physically separated.

* Network traffic is a smaller amount transparent : Ancient traffic observance tools
have a tough time recognizing doubtless malicious anomalies inside network .
traffic that is traveling east-west between virtual machines, therefore NFV needs a
lot of fine - grained security solutions.

* Complex layers need multiple kinds of security : Network functions virtualization
environments area unit inherently advanced, with multiple layers that are a unit
laborious to secure with blanket security policies.

NFV Architecture

In a traditional network specification, individual proprietary hardware devices like
routers, switches, gateways, firewalls, load balancers and intrusion detection systems all
do completely different networking tasks. A virtualized network replaces these items of
apparatus with computer code applications that run on virtual machines to perform
Networking tasks.

An NFV design consists of three parts :

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

A

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 35 ---
]
il
/ 11281175
@) LDDO! FANAN nhH

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 36 ---
sl
it

" I order to alter the physical and virtual network’if,ié;.'”‘&“" /FI use
'nndardxsed x86 computer hardware and software, indﬁdir:gr ~ ) p 7‘ vir ual
machines and virtual infrastructure managers. It provides the physical esources -
~ computing, storage, networking and computer code - on which virtual network J i‘? 5
are set up and controlled. To enable logically dividing and provisioning hardware
resources to support VNFs, the NFVI offers the virtualization layer that resides above the -
hardware. The NFVI is also crucial for building global networks that do not have the

regional restnchons associated with older network topologies.

W¥1] Virtual Network Functions

On top of the physical networking infrastructure, virtualized network functions are
run in one or more virtual machmes Routers, switches, SD-WAN, ﬁrewalls and a
growing number of other network services are included in VNFs and are now sold as
software by companies like Cisco, Juniper Networks and Town Networks.

Because network operations are virtualized, there is no longer a need for on-the-spot .
technical expertise when VNFs are remotely deployed. This eliminates preparatory delays :
caused by outdated network gear. In hybrid and multi cloud systems, VNFs provide the
flexibility needed to predict or respond to changing network performance or growth

NFV Management and Network Orchestration(MANO)

A social unit of the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) may
have created the NFV management and network orchestration (MANO) framework. NFV
MANO controls resourcés, including the NFVI as well as VNFs, running in a highly
virtualized data centre as well as calculations, networking, storage and virtual machines,
from original conception to day-to- day operations (VM). To help architects choose the
best NFVI resources to deploy, NFV MANO utilises templates for standard VNFs.

NFV MANO is comprised of three useful areas :
* NFV adapter handles VNF on boarding, lifecycle management, world

management and vahdanon and authorization of NFVI resource requests. o |
S

resource

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS " - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 37 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 38 ---
. comeclims to Production workloads located in the AWS N rth o i
Wherever they connected to the Oracle Cloud on the on ramp, Pm“"

connections connect geographic area with to provide access to workloads Wﬂl‘iﬁ?
Phoenix. The manufacturer's secure, private connection between their AWS and Or:

workloads solved the synchromsatlon performance issues w1thout adding any motg
physical infrastructure.

Equinix Eliminates the Complexness of Building NFV Architectures

« Enterprises may overcome the limitations of legacy network infrastructures thanks to _ "
NFV designs. Through virtualization, network services may be prepared quickly and
as-needed without being dependent on the underlying hardware. The supply of the
underlying physical and virtual infrastructure resources is swiftly handled by the
management and orchestration layers.

+ Equinix has simplified the NFVI construction and multi-vendor VNF onboarding
processes. This assures the functionality of those network services and gives clients the
option to select from a wide range of top suppliers including Cisco, ]umper Networks,
and Palo Alto Networks. With its global software-defined interconnection, ECX
FabricTM, Equinix's approach to NFV designs accommodates both the continuous need

for physical installations and the need for cloud and network connectivity.

* By comprehending the essential elements of NFV designs and therefore the global
resources that Equinix offers, businesses will take the first steps toward more potency o
in designing, implementing and controlling their global network resources. "

NFV Vs. SDN
1. While NFV separates specialised hardware components from networking services

2. Software-defined networking, or SDN, separates network forwarding tasks from
network management activities including routing, policy creation and applications.

3. SDN enables the programming of whole networks through a smgle pane of glass
i because a virtual network control plane determines where to transmit traffic.

SDN enables the automation of network control procedures, enabling the network

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 39 ---
| - 5 -'J'.%I.Ll

- FLTINR

i

p o euph&sml network or a virtual network.
Vfrh_ia_lization technology is essential to the operation of both SDN and N

. I

|
¥ -ty chanoin: r workloads., w0
L0 Cllal Al FAANAN il 4 L) - 4 e r
. o B Gl & B L . L -
20 Sl 1" "y F * - } ) V?‘F”
il

. 2

~ BANFV Use Cases ‘ '“7"
Here are five examples of network function virtualization use cases that exhibxt
NEFV is being used to tackle a range of challenges as well as offer better solutions to these
and other networking hurdles in order to enhance services and diminish outgoings.

Use case 1- Network virtualization

The main utilization with that NFV technologies square measure being employed
by chiefly telecommunication corporations round the world is, of course, for
network virtualization.

This method creates a virtual network on prime of the physical network and

permits service suppliers to expand and accelerate development and innovation of _

services, also as different network needs like provisioning.

In order to optimize their network services, customers look to network
virtualization to decouple their network functions like DNS, caching, IDS and
firewalling from the proprietary hardware that was, till recently, the dominant
solutions, thus on alter them to run on package instead.

This gives service suppliers the lightsomeness and suppleness they have once
rolling out new network services and may facilitate to scale back their
disbursement on space-stealing physical hardware and also the prices related to
running, maintaining and infrequently repairing it.

However, whereas network virtualization is one amongst the foremost widespread
applications of network functions virtualization, it is by no suggests that the sole
one.

Use case 2- Mobile edge computing

e = - TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® - an up-thrust for knowledge

Mobile edge computing is another technological innovation that has gone from
strength to strength over the past number of years and appears solely to be gaining
momentum as we feature on into 2018, Whereas several could raise however
network operate virtualization and mobile edge computing relate to at least on¢ i
another, so as such joined and are actively influencing one another in each area of
development and also the enlargement of applications. ; -

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 40 ---
kA
o
s)\'4

e TS mﬂe'm-rfm aeden

~» Networ owmd Virmliuﬂom aboard different technological
r .amm and developments like software-defined networldns mi
e science, can possibly become the prime solutions for the network chal
tomorrow thanks to their early integration and combination with one another.

Use case 3 - Video analytics ,

o Another tool that has seen a large increase in its potential since the beginning of the -
net of things is video analytics systems and packages. -

o Now, corporations square measure able to capture large amounts of knowledge
exploitation of IoT and sensible devices in their factories, stores, offices and even -
farms.

e One of the largest problems facing trendy networking is end-to-end network
latency, that poses a true challenge to applications and network services that
square measure very sensitive to network delays, like video analytics. .

e In order to combat this challenge, enterprises are turning to NFV and SDN
architectures so as to scale back network resource utilization and improve latency.

This could, once combined with exploitation video analytics at the network edge,
scale back information measure use by up to ninetieth in keeping with some |
proposals. ‘
¢ With IoT, smart and edge devices sanctioning a lot of and a lot of knowledge to be |
generated, collected and so analysed, video analytics systems and packages became 1
and can still be a progresswely necessary part of utilizing the massive knowledge 1
currently on the market. Network functions virtualization is the design of that to B
make these systems upon.

Use case 4 - Orchestration engines
¢ One of the most advantageous NFV use cases is that of orchestration engines. With
conventional legacy networks, issues such as low agility, human error and lack of
automatic processes and alerts made these kinds of networks extremely inadequate
in their capabilities.
* One of the principal causes of network downhme is human error, hence why
automated systems are in such high demand.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 41 ---
b-n

{ 'w‘ﬁ e r Al )
e 4 i ninney O CcL ol
PRIy v R AP

b
>y
[

utor ale

g S b " . g - -  y— "o T "']P’.:(ﬂ.l
= Centralized policy automation i
~* Centralized hybrid WAN management it ¢ st
~ *  Network wide visibility and segmentation - ivth o

*  Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate management
* Plugand play from day 0. |

Use case 5 - Security | L

* The tools we use to safeguard our physical and virtual tools have developed as

~ result of the numerous technical advances that have taken place over the past ten
years, much like the tools we use to grow our crops or build our automobiles,

* However, in fact, firewalls are merely cne of almost every security device or

~ component that will ultimately be virtualized utilising network functions
 virtualization as well as software-defined networking. Virtual firewalls are now
available from several security providers to secure VMs.

e The concept of centralized control mechanisms and evenly dispersed enforcement
is one of the key benefits of adopting virtualized security; for these two reasons
alone, businesses wishing to strengthen their security have flocked to research
these sorts of security solutions.

* The world may not have been fully conquered by network function virtualization
just yet, but as the world becomes more virtual and NFV (as well as SDN) gain
traction, we may soon witness a day when virtual security, as well as the other use
cases featured on this list, become the norm rather than |

the exception.

Challenges for Network Functions Virtualization

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 42 ---
HIOUE md“s“y‘smdﬂd hardwaxe am;l qoftwa:e are to;m ounc

. px NFV, service providers can nevertheless experience vmm Software
- components must be completely interoperable in order for it to function. Tk
~ resultant network ought to provide quick scalability, flexibility - and esource
allocation advantages. In order to avoid SDN and NFV implementation difficult : )
and to make it possible for end-to-end services to operate multi vendor networks
made up of both physical and v1rtua1 components, hybrid, vendor-agnostlc
orchestration is essential. wlE

e In order to create market-ready, VNF-based service packages that prevent VNF
vendor lock-in and allow service providers to immediately launch new services,
the market also needs more thorough preparation among partnérs. Full access to
interchangeable Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) that may be used effectively
and affordably should be made possible via NFV.

2. Business cases ,
¢ The idea that software applications runmng on common platforms would be able
to achieve throughput and latency requirements without using a considerable
amount of CPU resources is unrealistic. Operators are aware that the cost
reductions brought about by NFV are outweighed by the requirement to install full
racks of computing resources to address an issue that could prevmusly be handled

by a single device. The expenses of the CPU and servers, rack space and electricity
needed to match the performance footprint of a dedicated solution wind up being ' i
on par with or even more expensive than alternatives that were Speciﬁcally ¥ :

intended for the task. Operational simplicity and much lower total cost of

ownership are still only concepts.

3. Lack of capabilities
* It is not surprising that NFV offers a chance to lower OPEX and 1mprove the

customer experience. The availability of vendor solutions and the slower adoption
of technologies allowing service providers to acquire the skills required to
operationalize SDN/NFV are two challenges. Service provider's networks
transition from hardware-centric, semi-static connectivity platforms to software-
driven, dynamic service platforms as a result of the adoption of SDN and NFV. 1ti 15 # j ‘

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 43 ---
~ network and IT as a problem. The organisati

e

5. Lack of standards

7. Security and privacy

golsn s

ain barriers weren't regulatory concerns. However, respondents did i
of a governance structure that encourages commmu’&'éﬁa‘ﬁ between.
ional tasks of the network and 1
departments should synchronise or integrate as the industry transitions to a mog,
software-oriented strategy. The blending of network and IT tasks goes against hoy,
most service providers are set up, yet it is now widely accepted. e T

e Standards were referred to as a srhall impediment, although they are frequem]yu
mentioned as widespread impediments to innovation. In many instances,

standards help innovation catch up. While standards organizations are trying to

make their procedures more efficient, they frequently find it difficult to keep up
with the fast-paced competition in the sector. Service providers and their strategic -
partners are under pressure from this dynamic to invest in and create multi
vendor, end-to-end solutions that can automatically adapt to standards over time.

6. Management and orchestration issues

e SDN/NFV delivers dynamism and scalability, which makes administration and
orchestration in multi tenant environments challenging. The network should
handle circumstances when resource needs fluctuate significantly in comparati\}ely
short durations in order to flexibly distribute resources on-the-fly. To meet this

demand, a flexible, automated and programmable orchestration platform is
necessary.

e New potential attacks on software networks are made possible by the open
interfaces that facilitate the network's programmability. This necessitates the
_development of a standardized, multi-level security architecture that includes -
guidelines and controls for software integrity, remote attestation, dynamic threat
detection and‘ mitigation, user authentication and accounting managemeﬁ*
SDN/NFV-related security and privacy issues are now a problem.
;

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® . an up-thrust for knowledae

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 44 ---
« To help clients create scalable, dependable, secure and affordable netw;_orki for

their organisations, Juniper Networks designs, develops and dxsfﬂimies'ﬁfgg‘ &
performance network solutions and services. The firm is divided into two divisions
: Product and services. Virtual private networks, service control gateways,
orchestration and automation and virtualized network functions are just a few of '
the network function virtualization options provided by Juniper Networks.
e The corporation is present in a number of areas, including the Ainericas, Asia- 8
Pacific, the Middle East and Africa, thanks to its subsidiaries and a robust "
distribution network. Mist System, Inc.,, AppFormix, Inc. and Aurrion, Inc. are a
few of its subsidiaries (U.S.). |

Ericsson A
¢ One of the top suppliers of ICT to service providers is Ericsson. The business offers
network assistance and is a pioneer in 4G and 5G mobile technology. It does
business through the network, digital services, managed services, and other
business segments. The company's portfolio includes telecom services, internet and
multimedia solutions for operators, businesses and the media sector, as well as
mobile and fixed network infrastructure. 5 i

* The corporation has operations throughout the Americas, Asia-Pacific, the Middle
East, and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Among
its subsidiaries are Cenx, Inc., Ericsson-LG (South Korea), and Ericsson-Nikola
Tesla (Croatia) (U.S.). \

Cisco Systems, Inc.

* The Internet is powered by a wide variety of technologies that Cisco Systems
creates and sells. Its intent-based solutions are continually learning and adapting
across networking, security, collaboration, apps and the cloud to give customers a
highly secure, intelligent platform for their digital company. The business is
divided into four divisions : Infrastructure platform, services, application, security,
and others. Advanced technologies are provided by the corporation, including IP
technology, security, home networking, optical networking, storage area
networking and wireless portals.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 45 ---
ob. er ininformation technology, HewlettPackard offers o ., mers,
Qﬂ mgdium-sxzed businesses, major corporatlons and the health and e cat
;sectors a comprehenmve range of hardware and related services. The firm STovide
a range of network function virtualization services, including era ,':]m{‘
research, data-dnven security enhancement and ongoing security malntenance

e The firm is present throughout I North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, La’an

| and the Middle East and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust dlstn ion
E network b
e The Hewlett Packard Enterprise has a number of subsidiaries, including Voodoo]’c
(Canada), Apogee Corporation Limited (UK), and Indigo America, Inc. (U.S.). ol

il

90

Fujitsu, Ltd. k
e The top ICT firm in the world, Fuptsu provides a w1de selection of technologledl |
goods, services and solutions. Technology Solutions, Ubiquitous Solutions, and
Device Solutions make up the company's three business segments. The firm 1
provides a range of network function virtualization solutions, including those for
networks, storage, computation and virtual evolving packet cores. |
* The corporation has operations throughout the Middle East and Africa, Europe,
Asia and North America thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network:
Fujitsu FSa$, Inc., Nifty Corporation, PFU Limited and FDK Corporation are a few
of its subsidiaries.
Affirmed Networks
¢ Affirmed Networks, a 2010-founded company with its headquarters in
Massachusetts, strives to change and advance intelligence in mobile data netWo‘ks'
- The business creates a mobile network platform that offers network slicing, |
~ probe and analytics and IoT virtualization solutions. The company's mobile
~ capabilities include cloud-native mobile core solutions, virtualized DPI and Gi &
- services, optimised IoT access, Wi-Fi and service automation. The C01'P°mtwn B

~ Operations in North America, Europe and Asia-Pacific thanks to its subs
and robust distribution network. |

- &n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 46 ---
it Pimeez % the implmghﬁm,.oj slized- ol

netmrk operators all over the world. For commwﬁatlml mﬁm iders, the

firm focuses on speeding and redefining the change of mobile netwuk ""\“' :

The firm offers a range of network function virtualization technologies, h“h

virtualized radio access network, evolved packet core and packet compute. e

o The corporation is present throughout North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, Iﬂﬁn i
America, the Middle East and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust
distribution network. Its subsidiaries include Aquto Corporation, Ranzure
Networks, Inc. and Netonomy, Ltd. (U.S.).

Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

e Leading ICT solution supplier Huawe1 Carrier Business, Enterprise Business,
Consumer Business and Others make up the company's four business segments. It
provides services for network function virtualization, including EC IoT solutions
and services for intelligent computing.

e The corporation is present across North America, Europe, Asia-Padific, the Middle
East, and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Huawei
Device Co., Ltd., Huawei Machine Co., Ltd., and Shanghai Huawei Technologles
Co., Ltd. are a few of its subsidiaries.

Ribbon Communications, Inc.
¢ Real-time communications industry pioneer Ribbon provides cutting-edge
software solutions. The firm is divided into two divisions : Product and services.
The business provides next-generation communication technologies, such as
internet protocol, session initiation protocol, software-defined WAN (SD-WAN) for
unified communications and communication platform as a service. Ribbon
function virtualization services and solutions,

provides a range of network
t edges, virtual mobile cores, virtual internet

including next-generation intelligen
L - protocols and mobile network evolution.

* The corporation has operations throughout North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific,
the Caribbean and Latin America and the Middle East and Africa thanks to its
subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Genband LLC, I Taqua Inc, Network

- Equipment Technologies Inc and Performance Technologies Inc. are a few of its

-subsidiaries (U.5.).

- an un-thrust for kmnbdm

TEAHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 47 ---
iR G ‘netororking. W W ‘spmbvationt Gl
ﬂ_, , ,_T; y and economics of Ethet with the dependability and capaaty of
b‘“’mﬁz all while delivering the top network automation in the sector
~ business is divided into four divisions : Global services, platform software ar
* services, automation software and services and networking platform. The Blsine
also provides network function virtualization solutions such a virtual Wl.p-"

- gateway, virtual evolved packet core and virtual radio access network.

* The corporation is present throughout North America, the Caribbean and Latin
America, Asia-Pacific, Europe, the Middle East and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries
and a robust distribution network. Its subsidiaries include Packet Design and
Centina Systems (U.S.)

Comparison of NFV and NV

NFV

It outlines the key components of the complete
network, including its infrastructure, services

and available applications. It provides network
policies that control how network resources are
allocated and used. The hypervisor coordinates
and regulates lower-level network operations.

It is architecture is centered on data centers.

By centralizing network control and
programmability, NFV separates the control
~ plane and the data forwarding plane,

3y centralizing network control and
programmability, SDN isolates the contro]
plane from the data forwarding plane.

- TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS®

R | _ ~@n Up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 48 ---
coiporate IT serves as the SDN Buslne;s
~ Initiator.

Industry-standard servers or switches are used
.~ to execute SDN applications.

SDN reduces network expenses further by
doing away with the requirement for pricey
- switches and routers.

Review Questions with Answers

1. Define NFV. (Refer section 5.1)
2. How Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) works (Refer section 5.1.1) Marks 5

3. What are benefits of network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.1.2)
4. What are the risks of network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.1.3) Marks 5

5. Explain NEV architecture. (Refer section 5.2)
6. What are the challenges for network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.2)
7. Comparison of NFV and NV (Refer section 5.7) | Marks 6|

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 49 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 50 ---
N }" ""! i "; ing entails a controller that resemble
;:uiaparts an meStack.APL mappmg to its own internal s
)'1 A

APLto SDN apphcatlons like the one in Fig. 6.1.1 (originally intended to be IF- ij

’ based.) A data centre orchestration application is shown in the Fig. 6.1.1 that may
- used to set up virtual routers on hosts in order to connect the overlay mstanm

SDN system

IF-MAP

BGP, DMI, XMPP

Flg 6.1 1 ngh-lovol oporatlon of Junlpor networks virtual network system SDN contro"‘f
‘system

¢ The controller is a multi-node system with several different subsystems. The g0
this strategy is to promote high availability, scalability and extensibility. The §
B can manage scale out server modules for analytics, Conﬁgurauon AN con'- I

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 51 ---
R Facilitates the <.tompiler that uses the high-level data model to exchange API requests
b for network actions into low-level data model for implementation via the control code.

Control |

» The BGP speaker for horizontal scale distribution between controllers (or |
administrative domains) and the implementer of the low-level data model (L3VPN :
network primitives distributed via XMPP commands-VRFs, routes, policies/filters).

This server also collects statistics and other management information from the agents it

manages via the XMPP channel.

BGP, a defined protocol enabling horizontal scalability and the possibility for multi

vendor interoperability, is used by the control node to distribute network state. In the

near term, nevertheless, compatibility with already-existing BGP networks makes it

more valuable. The design incorporates lessons learned from more contemporary,
open-source architecture projects that deal with massive, volatile data storage and
communication across modular component parts. The contrail solution makes use of

tested internal system open source solutions.

IETF(Internet Engineering Task Force) SDN Framework
e The IETF is looking into SDN models for workable technological solutions. An
SDNRG (IRTF SDN Research Group) session at IETF 86 in Orlando, Florida,
included multiple presentations on various potential solutions. The seminar
discussed Network Function Virtualization (NFV), which entails utilising the
virtualization technology of network equipment, as well as a wide range of other

relevant issues, including the examination of OpenFlow. .

* A brief introduction to the forwarding and control element separation (For CES) !

protocol, which is theoretically comparable to OpenFlow, was also given. It is

~intended that this thorough analysis would enable SDNRG to offer suggestions on

the architecture of the protocol, network and service and that it will speed up in-

depth debate.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 52 ---
Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 53 ---
©and wmﬂns system that Suppom J.va."n\e foﬂm\g}wu are :
~ controller, an application of the Software Defined Network (SDN) concept :

4"

1. Maven : OpenDaylight employs Maven for easy build automaﬁon. Ma I makes :
use of pom.xml (Project Object Model) to script the dependencies among bundles
and describe what bundles to load and start.

2. OSGi : This framework is the back-end of OpenDaylight as it penmts dyna:mcally

loading bundles and packages JAR files and binding bundles jointly for exchanging
information.

3. JAVA interfaces : Java interfaces are used for event listening, specifications and
forming patterns. This is the main way in which specific bundles implement call-
back functions for events and also to indicate awareness of specific state.

4. REST APIs : These are northbound APIs such as topology manager, host tracker,
flow programmer, static routing and so on.

* Applications use the open northbound APIs that the controller exposes. The

northbound APIs enable both bidirectional REST and the OSGi framework.

- Applications that run in the same address space as the controller utilise the OSGi

framework, but those that do not (or even do not run on the same system as) the

controller use the REST (web-based) APIL. The apps include the business logic and
algorithms. The controller is used by these applications to acquire network information,
analyse data using its algorithm and then coordinate the implementation of new rules
across the network. Multiple protocols, including OpenFlow 1.0, OpenFlow 1.3, BGP-

LS and others, are supported as plugins on the southbound. At first, the Opq\payhght

controller used an OpenFlow 1.0. southbound plugin. Qher OpenDaylight contributors

start adding up to the controller code. These modules are linked dynamically into a

Service Abstraction Layer (SAL).

* The SAL exposes the services that the modules developed north of it are designed to

use. Regardless of the underlying protocol used between the controller and the

network devices, the SAL determines how to provide the desired service. As OpenFlow
and other protocols develop over time, this safeguards the application’s investment.

The controller must be aware of the devices in its domain, including their capabilities,

reachability and other factors, in order to control them. The Topology Manager

maintains and manages this data. The creation of the topology database for the

Topology Manager is assisted by other components including ARP handler, Host

rmd P!
—ALINIAAL DRI IMATIANCS an 1in thros

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 54 ---
‘. “

q” Initlstrators Have E{“&-\ icé of ising a single protocol or h cmnbiﬁa'h %

"'ﬁ lle complica'teﬂ {85t as they arise thanks to this modular and 1 e

Mtegy All SDN systems, including OpenFlow, Open VSwitch (OVS) D3 ’

h’(bm), NETCONF, and BGP, are supported by the platform. B '_

* The open communications protocol that enables the SDN Controller to interact w
forwarding plane and modify the network is defined by the OpenFlow protocot

- is regarded as the first SDN standard. Businesses can better adapt to their cl'ian 4:1
demands and have more control over thelr networks thanks to this.

OpenDaylight (ODL) Archltecture

. OpenDayhght is a modular open platform for customizing and automating networks --
any size and scale. The OpenDaylight Project arose out of the SDN movement, witha
clear focus on network programmability. It was designed from the outset as a

foundation for commercial solutions that address a variety of use cases in ex:slm&
network environments.

ODL architecture has three layers :
1. Southbound plugins : Used to communicate with the network devices.

2. Core Services : Which can be used by Service Abstraction Layer (SAL) Whld'l is
based on OSGi to help components going in and out of the controller while the
controller is running.

3. Northbound interfaces : Which allows operators to relate high-level pohaes to
network devices or integration of ODL with other platforms.

1. Modularity and extensibility ‘;

¢ ODL's built-in techniques make it easier to ; join code modules The controller uses:
OSGi containers to load bundles dynamically, giving it a very flexible way to 2 add
functionality. | o

. ~ TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® . |
s _ BLICATIONS .- an up-thrust for knowleage
.;h‘_‘l—_ﬂ-"%—'——_._ b . : :

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 55 ---
aseajay uabAxQ ybylequady

1

Fig. 6.3.

ODL Architecture

¢
T
8
<
I3
X
o
&
-
s
=
£
1
<
c
«
.
v
=<
<
=
S
S
T
=
Q
<
<
<
S
w
(=

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 56 ---
res emb!lng multi-site deployments foi
‘speed and | fault mletance, ODL's most recent version si
platform's scalability and resilience.
» Cluster scalability : AKKA, a distributed datastore, distributes the current SDN
state and enables controllers to failover in the case of a cluster split, while ODL has 1
internal capability 'fof cluster maintenance.

e However, when a cluster expands, communication and coordination tasks rise
ements for each additional cluster member.

gniﬁcantly improves ,

quickly, limiting performance improv
e Scalability of architecture : To manage traffic flows across the SDN islands, ODL
has native BGP routing capabilities.
e OpenDaylight's integration with OpenStack enabled multi-site networking and
improved networking performance.

3. Interfaces
e Southbound : A wide range of Southbound interfaces are supported, mcludmg _
OpenFlow, P4, NETCONF, SNMP, BGP, RESTCONF and PCEP. '
e Northbound : ODL provides the broadest selection of gRPC and RESTful
northbound interfaces. The OSGi for applications running in the same address
space as the controller and the common RESTful interface are among the
northbound interfaces offered by ODL. To make integration and development

tasks easier, Northbound interfaces are graphically represented using DLUX.

4. Telemetry |
e ODL includes just a small amount of telemetry-related capabilities at the project
level.
e Although there are steps toward offering northbound telemetry feeds with the
most recent development release, they are still in the early stages of design and are
not expected to be ready for production in the near future.

5. Resilience and fault tolerance
e Similar to ONOS, the ODL fault tolerance method requires an odd number of SDN
_controllers to offer fault tolerance in the system. In the case of a master node
failure, the network would pick a new leader to assume control. These controllers

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

= an up-thrust for knowiedge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 57 ---
6. Pro ' ' * iy " tefug 9";1101- 51 Prioe | "*‘l‘ > o
Hee %ﬂmalmtuaseviewpomommmmwmmnvr ‘ol yr geRe
T. communw g '“Q -
‘e The second SDN controller in the Linux Foundation Networkmg fanuly 19 “M

ODL. Of all the open source SDN controllers on the market, this proyect has the 3

broadest community support and numerous well-known firms are actively
engaged in its development. TPEL S b0

Floodlight Controller

* Anew open and programmable network is presented by Software Defined Networking

(SDN), which combines connection-oriented technologies with routing overlay
technology. Bringing control planes into a logically centralized SDN controller, which

may then function as a network operating system and decoupling control and data

planes from network devices.

* This is Floodlight controller, an OpenFlow controller. While applications built on top of
the Floodlight controller implement various capabilities to address various user
demands across the network, the Floodlight controller implements a set of common
functionalities to control and query an OpenFlow network. Floodlight is made up of
application modules that implement solutions for various problems and controller
modules that implement the essential network functions that a software defined

network would expose to apps.

Salient Features of Floodlight Controller™"
¢ Developers may benefit from the Floodlight controller since it is designed in Java
and enables them to quickly adjust software and construct apps.
e REST APIs are included, which make it simpler to programmatically interact with

the product. Additionally, the Floodlight website provides coding samples to help _

developers create the product.
* The Floodlight controller has been tested with physical and virtual OpenFlow-
compatible switches and it can coexist with the resources presently available to

¥ RN

organizations. ! Y "‘&

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 58 ---
,#" iﬂbodllght can be run as the network backend for OpenStack using a ’ﬁ’ 23
g h!fbﬁ! that exposes a networking-as-a-service model with a REST API
""Flooaiight offers.

FloodLight Platform
Itis an Open source SDN controller platform with followmg features »
1. Apache-licensed |
2. OpenFlbw protocol
3. Javabased
4. Enterprise class controller .

Application tier . |

Circuit
pusher

switch N‘iiore ﬂoodligﬁt applicationé

Control plane tier

Data plane tier |

OpenFlow
hypervisor OﬁenFlow
switches physical

switches

Fig.6.4.1: FloodLight overview k

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS

- an up-thrust for kwo

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 59 ---
2. Flow installation/deletion - VA bl desg balsolbnateds dibe

3. Stats query

e LLDP protocol

* Install/modify/delete a flow on aswitch | laae
e Flowis deﬁnegl as all packets with the same match.

e Packet counts
¢ Flow counts

e Port stats query -Etc.

Bandwidth Calendaring (BWC)

A better use of network resources is made possible by new services made possible by
software defined networking. A common example of this is bandwidth calendaring
(BWC), which uses information about future traffic to best pack the developing needs
over the network. ’

To investigate a typical BWC scenario in which a network operator must provide
bandwidth to meet specified, time-varying needs at the lowest possible cost and within
a predetermined time window. Low complexity strategies for the breakdown of the
original mixed integer problem into smaller ones by taking use of the issue's structure.
Numerical findings show that the suggested solution methodology is almost optimum
and performs more than 20 % better than conventional techniques based on linear
programming relaxations and randomized rounding. |

The network architecture of data centers has undergone a significant transformation
because of software-defined networking (SDN). Programmable data planes are offered
by SDN and may be set up from a distant, logically centralized controller. Additionally,
carrier network operators and Internet service providers may be able to utilise their
network resources more effectively thanks to the great flexibility and reprogramming
ability of SDN infrastructures.

In the long run, this would allow for new access services like Bandwidth Calendaring i
(BWC), which entails allocating network resources for Sizable. fl.lture bandwidth k"
bookings. Wide Area Networks (WAN) are essential for the fur}chom:.\g of businesses |
and Over-The-Top (OTT) service provide;s. To prevent congestion, this network mus‘t ¥

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner



--- Page 60 ---
currentl}; be 6ver;pm§isioned in accordance with anticipated pe.ak traffic, B‘,‘Sine&,s

may now dynamically modify connections in accordance with their demands thankg ¢,

SDN.

‘o Currently, in order to minimize congestion, this network must be over-provisioned i,
accordance with the anticipated peak demand. With the help of SDN, businesses may
now dynamically change connections to suit their needs. They are therefore solely

- responsible for paying for the network resources they actually utilize. The broaq
adoption of such services is hampered by the absence of automated procedures that
- accommodate time-varying bandwidth requirements.

* Reservations for bandwidth may be divided into two groups, generally speaking,
Unpredictable bandwidth needs that are much less than the available capacity make up
the first group. They often happen when a consumer encounters an unforeseen spike in
traffic. The second categbry is the outcome of huge data transfers, which often take up
a significant portion of the network's capacity over a prolonged period of time.

&
g TSN A S SR S R o o o e v e e o A0 S . e, e e v s e o e AR

| 66 |

i i {

Band § | : :

idth ) i

Request 1 et . - St :
' Flexibility | : _ f

o ] T Tlme ;
;LV_____L_) {

—————————

P e e e s o e - - -y

I
Band 5,G :
Request n width 1G l | l 26
I ! :
i : Time f

NS Eh wn s e e n e e e e W

Fig. 6.5.1 : A Bandwidth calendar

» Many of these criteria may tolerate delays. As a result, the associated bandwidth
reservations are flexible and may be arranged at any moment throughout a
predetermined time window. The beginning time of each bandwidth request must be
determined using the calendar of requests shown in Fig. 6.5.1 and traffic engineering
tunnels must be set up to suit their variable bandwidth needs.

* In this essay, we discuss the challenge a network operator has when deciding how to

F,.@f " the traffic accepted volume,

| TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS '

- an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 61 ---
laced by the tasks and the orchestration of processes. ‘wq%“ht Al

1ol

"h‘-}‘i'a_ X

oo

center orchestration
g v g TR I SO

IT admins

Containers

‘Configuration Performance Load Security
balancing scaling poiicies

Automation

Fig. 6.6.1 : Data center orchestratlon

o Fig. 6.6.1 Shows the process of data center orchestration. The automation of tasks is
used by data centre orchestration software to carry out procedures, such installing new

servers. An agile DevOps strategy is made possible by automation systems that

organize data centre operations, allowing for continuous application enhancement.

e Think about a band's vocalists or instruments. Similar to how software defined

programmes each have a distinct purpose, each has its unique sound. But when they

blend nicely, a distinctive sound is created. |
* The concept of orchestration describes how many activities might be combined to serve

a bigger goal. It produces a highly functional and responsive data centre by organizing

all the duties of numerous services. ‘ | |
s The data centre is under increasing strain as a result of the enormous volume of data ' .

moving to cloud computing. A centrally managed data centre is required.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowlodgo

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 62 ---
 Data centre orchestration solutions provide the following advantages :

B ’

Streamlined creation of resources in the public and private clouds. |

A shorter time lag exists between a business demand and the point at which the
infrastructure can provide it.

 The IT department has less time to deliver a domain-specific environment.

A framework for controlling data transferred between a business process and
application is provided by data centre orchestration systems.

They employ the following capabilities :

N N

Tracking and publishing APIs for automatic updates of metadata management.
Updating policy enforcement and providing alerts for corrupted data.
Intégrating data services with cloud services.

Scheduling and coordination of data services. .

Leveraging of distributed data repository for large data sets.

Data Center Orchestration Tools

e Popular data centre orchestration and automation solutions for data centre and cloud
settings include the ones listed below : 3

o

o

o

~environments. Lets every member of the IT ¢

Chef - Uses a client-server architecture and is based on Ruby. Presents the
infrastructure as a code.

Docker - Features isolated containers, which allows the execution of many
applications on one server.

Puppet - Built with Ruby and uses an agent/primary architecture. Created to
automate tasks for system administrators,

Ansible - An agentless configuration management tool. Created to push changes
and re-configure newly deployed machines. Has an ecosystem conducive for
writing custom apps. The platform is written in Python and allows users to script -
commands in YAML.,

Vagrant - Helps build, configure and manage lightweight virtual machine

eam have identi lopment
B orante. ldentical develop

[ECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner


--- Page 63 ---
in Open Daylight (ODL) architecture. (Refer section 63.1)

..mﬁmgmmmmw
6. Explain salient features of floodlight controller. (Refer section 6.4.1)
7. Explain bandwidth calendaring (BWC) . (Refer section 6.5)
9. Explain advantages of data center orchestration systems (Refer section 6.6.1)
10. Explain data center orchestration tools. (Refer section 6.6.2)

Scanned with CamScanner