
===== Page 1 =====

SHOMMRISIOL AANA AOAEEOOLPLOOOLO ION >REDIPIDE MEO EL

Introduction

Syllabus

Challenges of traditional networks, History of Software Defined Networking (SDN), Modern Data
Center - Traditional Switch Architecture - Why SDN - Evolution of SDN - How SDN Works -
Centralized and Distributed Control and Date Planes.

Contents

1.1. Challenges of Traditional Networks ....... : April-19,
1.2 History of Software Defined Networking (SDN)

Modern Data Center

‘Traditional Switch Architecture
Why SDN-
How SDN Works

Centralized and Distributed Control and Date Planes

(1-1)

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 2 =====

Challenges of Traditional Networks | | :

¢ The most common way of networking, traditional networking, uses fixed-function and
dedicated hardware and network devices, including switches and routers, to Contro|
network traffic. These devices have individual functions that work well together and
help to support the network. -

e The ability to scale is a frequent problem for- traditional networks. Most Switching
hardware and software is proprietary and it is uncommon for APIs to be exposed fo;
provisioning.

- Traditional networks tend to synergize well with proprietary provisioning software.
Unfortunately for traditional networks, this software is unable to be modified as
needed and hardware-centric networking can be very limiting in what it is able to use.

e Ina traditional router or switch architecture, both the control and data plane function
on a single device. . ;

¢ Traditional networking’s functions and functionality are implemented in the following
ways : . |

a) The functions are implemented from dedicated devices that use switches, routers
and application delivery controls. .
b) The functionality is primarily implemented in application-specific integrated
circuits (ASIC) and other dedicated hardware. ,
* Networks continue to expand and become more complex as network infrastructure
enlarges. In addition, new users and network services are constantly being added to the

network, Both new users and network services demand huge network resources, which
. is increasing exponentially.

e With regards to increasing size and complexity of networks, traditional approaches for
network management would -be highly inefficient. This places a serious strain on

- network operators as they are faced with the task of implementing diverse
configurations and keeping track of innumerous events on the network.

e Traditional networks face a constant challen
are few and most switching hardw
networks often operate effectively wi
this software cannot be changed as qui

ge in terms of flexibility. Provisioning APIs
are and software are proprietary. Traditional

th Proprietary provisioning software; howevel
ckly as needed.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” . an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 3 =====

software Defined Networks 1-3 Introduction

« Traditional networking consists of the following traits :

1. Traditional networking functions are typically performed by dedicated devices like

as switches, routers and application delivery controllers, which use one or more
switches.

2. Traditional networking functions are mostly implemented in dedicated hardware,
such as application-specific integrated circuits (ASIC). The restrictions of
traditional hardware-centric networking are one of its drawbacks.

e The networks were static in nature and were manually configured based on service
requests.

e Ina traditional network, on the other hand, the physical placement of the control plane
makes it difficult for an IT administrator to control traffic flow.
¢ In traditional network architecture, the control plane and data plane are integrated.

Any changes to the system are dependent upon configuring physical network devices,
the protocols and software they support.

¢ The control plane becomes software-based with SDN, making it accessible via a
connected device. This access allows IT. managers to better manage traffic flow from a
centralized User Interface (UI). Users have more control over how their networks run
and are set up thanks to this one place. For network segmentation, the ability to swiftly
process multiple network configurations from a centralized UJI is extremely useful.

EeIGTESTED

1. What are the challenges of traditional networks ? Do 4 you think SDN will be overcome? Justify

¢

ar 2] History of Software Defined Networking (SDN) {ear

. © Over the past two decades, networks have come under increased traffic demande and
increased scrutiny as both organizations and consumers increasingly rely on network
connectivity for sales, customer service, internal communications and document

. sharing. |

* Traditional network architectures are not designed in a’ way ‘that meets current
requirements. SDNs offer an alternative paradigm for meeting the needs of users, |
companies and service providers. |

* In SDNs, the control plane communicates via a southbound interface with all devices
on the network, maintains a holistic view of the network’s topology and programs the
network from a central point. |

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 4 =====

Software Defined Networks

1-4
Introduction

OpenFlow is the first standard communication . protocol that interfaces between
network devices and the SDN controller.

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) is a network architecture approach that enables
the network to be intelligently and centrally controlled, or ‘programmed,’ using
software applications. This helps operators manage the entire network Consistently and
holistically, regardless of the underlying network technology.

Software-defined networking is an architecture designed to make a network More
flexible and easier to manage. SDN centralizes management by abstracting the contro]
plane from the data forwarding function in the discrete networking devices.

SDN is important because it gives network operators new ways to design, build and
operate their networks. Software-defined networking paired with network functions
virtualization is a key technology needed to meet new demands.

SDN separates the network’s control and forwarding planes and provides a centralized
view of the distributed network for more efficient orchestration and automation of

network services. The SDN controller platforms that organizations use allow for

communication between the now separated network planes.

Software Defined Networking enables the network administrators to deal with the data
in the network in a more efficient and innovative manner. By. using SDN network
administrators have the ability to control the data flow as well. as to alter the
characteristics of the switching devices (routing devices) in the network from a central
location with control application implemented as software modules without the need
of dealing with each device individually.

This gives the network administrators the ability to change routing tables in network
routing devices. This gives an extra layer of control over the network data as the
administrator can assign high/low priority to certain data packets or allow/block
certain packets flowing through the network with different levels of control. As a result
the network traffic can be controlled in an efficient manner and hence can be used as a

mechanism for traffic load management in networks.

Elements of SDN

¢ SDN architecture defines:‘how a networking and computing system can be designed to

_usea mix of open, software-based technologies with commodity networking hardware.
“SDN architecture separates the control and data planes of the network stack.

The OpenFlow protocol is an open source way to have the different planes of a network
communicate.

TECHNICAL PHIRI icaTiOns® ~ an tin-thniet far knawlaraa

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 5 =====

Software Defined Networks 1-5

Introduction

« SDN controllers communicate with applications via the northbound API and with the
network infrastructure via southbound APIs.

e Fig. 1.2.1 shows SDN architecture.

Northbound interface

Southbound interface
(OpenFlow, ForCES, etc)

Fig. 1.2.1: SDN architecture

. SDN components are : Data plane, control plan, Souridbound Interface, Northbound
Interface and Application Plane.

1.

A controller, the core element of an SDN architecture, that enables centralized

. Management and control, automation and policy enforcement across physical and

virtual network environments. The control of. all the data plane devices are done
via SDN controllers. It also controls the applications at application layer. SDN
controller communicate and control these upper and lower layers with APIs
through Interfaces.

Southbound APIs that relay information between the controller and the individual
network devices (such as switches, access points, routers, and firewalls) .
Northbound APIs that relay information between the controller and the

applications and policy engines, to which an SDN looks like a single logical
network device.

- Data plane is consists of various network devices both physical and virtual: The
‘main duty of data plane is forwarding.

eee

Q ~
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 6 =====

arkes 1-6
Software Defined Networks . ———Lntrodtetin

SDN Working :
are defined network uses a centralized SDN controller to deliver softy
. are.

« A softw
s. A network administrator can manage network policies fr
. Im A]

based network services.
central control plane without having to handle individual switches,

at communicate via northbound and southboung

¢ SDN architecture has three layers th
(APIs). Applications can use a northboung

Application Progranuning Interfaces

interface to talk to the controller. Meanwhile, the controller and switches can use

southbound interfaces to communicate.
© The layers include:
1. Application laye

with the SDN controller.
2. Control layer manages policies and traffic flow. The centralized controller manages

data plane behavior.
3. Infrastructure layer consists of the physical switches in the network.

r: SDN applications communicate behaviors and needed resources

Differences between Traditional Networking and SDN

KALE ARAEE AARRA RARE MAAAAAAMEAE BESS NEESER TEAR AE PARR SERINE te

os SDN

peer seaman aninengai ANAEMIA RAAS NE SAMA SASS NSAI

» Sr. oe Traditional ne

i NO. | | an ce bets .

1. Traditional networking is usually
2.

3. - t works using ; protocols

4, Traditional networking are static ic and inflexib DN. at ogame networks during
paras S well as at later stage

networks,
7 ; a oe change. in the requirements
5. Traditional networking ar are not {useful for new | :
business ventures, They possess lide: agility. and |
flexibility, |
6, With a traditional network the physica! location: |

of the control plane hinders f an IT administrator's
ability to control the traffic flow

7. int traditional network architecture, the control
ane plane and data plane: are Integrated,

geese

a plane

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 7 =====

Softwaro Dofinod Notworks 1-7

Challengos of Softwaro-Dofined Notworking

1. Scalability : When the network scales up in terms of both size
communication de]

Introduction

and diameter,
ays between the SDN controller and the network switches may
become high, thus affecting flow-setup latencies,

2, Flexibility and Performance : Flexibility refers to the capability possessed by

networks to adjust to new and unprecedented features such as; applications and

network services, Performance here deals with speed at which network nodes at the
data plane process information from control plane.

3. Security : Various threat mitigation strategies would eventually arise even as the

potential for unauthorized access increases. The best solution is for organizations to
define an efficient high-level security policy to effectively attain network protection.

4, Interoperability : In today’s multi-vendor environments, the limited interoperability

between SDN controller platforms is mainly due to a lack of open standards for
inter-controller communications. | |

[124] Advantages and Disadvantages of SDN

Advantages of SDN: ;
¢ It enables centralized management of networking devices.
¢ SDN enables the rapid movement of workloads across a network.

¢ Easily programmable : In SDN, control plane is easily programmable as it is
separated from the data plane. | . .

* It offers flexibility, scalability and efficiency compared to traditional networking. .
* SDN allows centralized management of the entire network

Disadvantages of SDN:
¢ Security is a big challenge in SDN.

* Single point of failure.

¢ Reconfiguring a SDN network is not a simple task since it involves lots of expenses.

1, What is SDN ? Explain SDN architecture. SRRURAprila LO aMarks

2, What are the fundamental characteristics of SDN ? Explain in brief. _ _
[SRRURVApriLgLONMarkst4}

@
TECHMICAL DHIREICATIONS — ~anuin.thrist far kroudadas

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 8 =====

Modern Data Center | |

¢ Data center’s are buildings where, multiple servers and communication gear are Co. |
located because of their common environmental requirements and physical Security
needs and for ease of maintenance. Data centers are specialized environments that
safeguard company's most valuable equipment and intellectual property, /

¢ Data center’s support the following things:

‘Processing of users business transactions

Hosting of company website

Process and store intellectual property

Maintain financial records

oR ey

Route electronic mails.

e The data center infrastructure i is central to the IT architecture, from which all content is
sourced or passes through. Proper planning of: the data center infrastructure design is
critical and performance, resiliency and scalability need to be carefully considered.

¢ Data center equipment's environmental conditions should fall within the ranges.

* Data center uses five core elements for processing. These elements are application,
database, network, storage array, operating system and server. |

¢ The main purpose of a data center is running the applications that handle the core
business and operational data of the organization. Data centers are the facilities that

will house the equipment in order to secure, store and exchange data.

1. User application : It is a computer program. Computation is performed in data
center. Application may include order processing, salary calculation etc. It uses
operating system and database for processing.

2. Database : A Database Management System: (DBMS) is a software package
designed to define, manipulate, retrieve and manage data in a database. A DBMS
always provides data independence. Any change in storage mechanism and
formats ‘are performed without modifying the entire application. Software for
organizing and serving data to users, managing physical storage of media and
Virtual resources,

3. Network : It provides communication between client and server. Network

resources refer to the telecommunication networks like intranets, extranets, and the
i.
Internet. These resources facilitate the flow of communication in the organizatio

® .
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS _ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 9 =====

software Defined Networks 1-9

Introduction

Networks consist of both physical devices such as network cards, routers, hubs and

cables and software such as operating systems, web servers, data servers and
application servers.

4, Storage array : It is a device which stores the data persistently for later use.

5, OS and server: OS provides a platform for processing.

On the client machine, required application software is installed. Customers can place

the order through this software. Client machine is connected to the server by using
local area network, Required database is installed on the server.

DBMS uses the server operating system for reading and updating databases. Database
is stored on the secondary storage device in the storage array.

Storage network provides the communication link between the server and the storage:
array and transports the read or writes commands between them. .

The storage array, after receiving ‘the read or write commands from the server, °
performs the necessary operations to store the data on physical disks.

[34] Traditional Switch Architecture

The core of a traditional network switch is based on custom silicon, either an ASIC,
FPGA or NPU. These hardware devices can forward packets based on layer 2 and
layer 3 input at-the requisite “wire speed. ” The control plane handles the routing
functions and calculates the packet forwarding rules. — ,

The fundamental problem. with traditional network architecture is that it is static. Users
don't have much controlling power and it.is- just trying to accommodate current
networking needs of the user. a

Data, Control and Management Planes

In traditional network architecture, the control plane and data plane are integrated.
Any changes to the system are dependent upon configuring physical network devices,
the protocols and software they support.

Fig. 1.4.1 shows roles of the control, management and data planes.

'

TERUNIRAL DEIDEIDATIONO lan tin He.e 4 ee

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 10 =====

Software Defined Networks 1-10 Introdtict.,

Data in

Data out

Control plane
Unknown packets} oo
control packels |..."

Data plane

“Contra and. ;
0 routing

Program
forwarding
table

Forwarding
table”

Fig. 1.4.1 : Roles of the control, management and data planes

: ie Configuration

Policy

¢ In traditional network, data plane, control plane and management plane are as follows:

1. SDN data plane

The data plane, also known as the forwarding plane, consists of a distributed set of
forwarding network elements in charge of forwarding packets.

The data plane consists of the various ports that are used for the reception and
transmission of packets and a forwarding table with its associated logic. The data
plane assumes responsibility for packet buffering, packet scheduling, header
modification and forwarding.

If an arriving data packet’s header infcrmation i is found in the forwarding table it
may be subject to some header field modifications and then will be forwarded
without any intervention of the other two planes.

Data plane is the network architecture layer that physically handles the traffic
based on the configurations supplied from the control plane. The data plane
performs functions of packet Dutfering, packet scheduling, header modification
and forwarding. |

Data plane : It performs packet streaming. Packet forward, filter, buffer, mark,
rate-limit and measure packets are the other functions.

The data plane parses packets headers, m manages encapsulations, queuing and
policing; it deals with user traffic. When packets are destined to or originating from
a router, they do not go through its data plane, only its control plane.

Only when packets are being sent through an intermediary router is when the

intermediary’s data plane is in use. The management plane deals with
administrative traffic in order to manage network traffic.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 11 =====

ofware Defined Networks

2, SDN control plane

. Control plane refers to the network architecture component that defines the traffic
routing and network topology.

¢ Control plane : It distributed algorithms and it maintains/performs track topology
changes, compute routes, install forwarding rules ete.

¢ The control plane consists of a centralized software controller that is responsible for
handling communications between network applications and devices through
open interfaces.

¢ Its principal role is to keep current information in the forwarding table so that the
data plane can independently handle as high percentage of the traffic as possible.

e The control plane is responsible for processing. a number of different control
protocols that may affect the forwarding table, depending on the configuration and
type of switch. These control protocols are jointly responsible for T managing the
active topology of the network.

e The SDN control layer i is commonly referred to as the network operating system as
it supports the network control logic and provides the application layer with an
abstracted view of the global network, which contains enough information to
specify policies while hiding all implementation details.

3. Management plane

¢ Network administrators configure and monitor the switch through this plane,
which in turn extracts information from or modifies data in the: control and data
planes as appropriate.

¢ The network administrators use some form of network management system to
communicate to the management plane in a switch.

* Management plane takes care of the wider network configuration, monitoring and
management processes across all layers of the network stack.

¢ Management planes collect measurements and configure the equipment.

[5] why spN
* Current network elements (router, switches) are limited controllable and
programmable. The network nodes are closed and bound to specific hardware.

* Updating topology and routing table entries ate complex tasks. No open standardized ©

interface to control and manage network hardware has been available at the beginning
of SDN,

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS _ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 12 =====

1-12

Software Defined Nolworks Introductio,

Routers and switches are regarded as closed source, without providing the ability fo,

flexible functional enhancements, simplified external control, functional Substitutions

or network evolution through new protocols.

* With SDN, your services and applications are logically separated from physical
network hardware and connections.

¢ With SDN’s central control and intelligence, bandwidth management, restoration,
security and policies become highly optimized.

e The ability to control network behavior using software external to the physical

networking devices gives an easy way to customize networks in support of new

services. | a

Intelligent SDN software can control hardware from disparate vendors that utilize Open

programmatic interfaces, such as OpenFlow..

Why is software-defined networking useful ? .
_@ Reasons are as follows:
1. Ease of network control via direct programming resulting from the separation from

forwarding functions.

2. Agility and the ability to dynamically use load balancing to manage the traffic flow
as needed and usage fluctuates. This reduces latency, increasing the efficiency of
"the network.

Greater granularity of control over security.

4, Ease of configuration.
Simplified network design and operation through the use of open controllers rather
than vendor-specific devices and protocols.
How SDN Works

Fundamental characteristics of SDN:
1. Separation of the forwarding and control planes. Forwarding plane is responsible
for handling packets in the data path based on the instructions received from the

.control plane. Actions of the forwarding: plane include, but are not limited to,
forwarding, dropping, and changing packets, .

: TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS” ~ an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 13 =====

software Defined Networks . 1-13

Introduction

o The forwarding plane i is usually the termination point for control-plane services
and applications.

O The forwarding plane can contain forwarding resources such as classifiers.

o The forwarding plane is also widely referred to as the “data plane’ or the "data
path’.

2. Simplification of devices which are then controlled by a centralized system running
management and control software. This - software-based controller may then
manage the network based on higher-level policies. The controller provides
primitive instructions to the simplified devices when appropriate in order to allow
them to make fast decisions about how to deal with i incoming packets.

3, Network automation and virtualization. . ‘

‘

SDN Operation

Software control program (controller) has an overview of the whole network and is —
responsible for the decision making, while the hardware (routers, switches etc.) is
simply responsible for forwarding packets into their destination as. 5 per the controller’s
instructions, typically a set of packet-handling: rules.

SDN devices contain forwarding functionality for deciding what to do with each

- incoming packet. The devices also contain the data which drives those-forwarding |

decisions. The data itself is actually represented by the flows defined by the controller,
as depicted 1 in the upper left portion of each device.

A network device is an aggregation of multiple resources such as ports, CPU, memory,
and queues. Examples of network devices include switches and routers. Each network

device has a presence ina forwarding plane and an operational plane.

The operational plane is responsible for the operational state of the network device, for
instance, with respect to status of network ports and interfaces. Operational-plane
resources include, but are not limited to, memory, CPU, ports, interfaces and queues.

Fig. 1.6.1 shows SDN operation overview.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 14 =====

Software Defined Networks

whee
ee ee
ee eee me

ae

'
i)
'
Northbound}
'
i

>

performance machine

Baa.” _—
toevatng

NK . “ ms a
Bago :

oSoaward ag ,

»

High

ee wwe ww eee ee een

Scuthzound
APi

SON devices

(TalakadhateRetetekataletedolal totetattedabaletedutatatatdedal

Fig. 1.6.1: SDN operation overview
The SDN controller is responsible for abstracting
controls and ‘Presenting an abstraction of these
applications running above. __ ;
¢ The controller allows the SDN application to de

application to respond to packets which are fo
devices.

the network of SDN devices it
network resources to the SDN

fine flows on devices and to help the
warded to the controller by the SDN

[7] Centralized and Distributed Control and Date Planes

* SDN provides separation between the contro]

plane (controller) and data plane (switch)
functions of networks using a protocol that

modifies forwarding tables in network
tworks on the fly and quickly respond to
d for manually reconfiguring existing

switches. This makes it possible to optimize ne
changes in network usage without the nee
infrastructure or purchasing new hardware.

e SDN separates the control of network devices from the data the

y transport and the
switching software from the actual network hardware.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 15 =====

software Defined Networks 1-15 Introduction

. Control plane is a component for network in SDN which can carry traffic and it can

focus on how an individual package will interact with its neighbours during state
exchange. . :

The data set used to store the network topology is called the Routing Information Base

(RIB). The RIB is often kept consistent through the exchange of information between
other instances of control planes within the network.

Forwarding table entries are commonly called the Forwarding Information Base (FIB) .
and are often mirrored between the control and data planes of a typical device.

e Routing information base makes forwarding information base more stable and also RIB
programs FIB.

when control plane receives packets from unknown resource then it will show warning
message to RIP protocol which can create and establish a new route and configuration
by FIB in data and control plane.
¢ Control plane will serid packets and data plane will receive them. Actually, control
plane makes some decisions and combinations for layer2orlayer3.
¢ Data plane refers to the tasks that a networking device does to forward a message. The ©
data plane handles incoming datagrams through a series of link-level operations that
collect the datagram and perform basic checks.
¢ Datagram is processed in the data plane by performing lookups in the FIB table that are
programmed earlier by the control plane. Data’plane responsible for parsing packet
headers of those ASICs has been searched by high speed. |
| | a O00

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS  - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 16 =====

Rereencenncceeeceercer
Unie Il |

SSANNARNAAASAARA LANA A AANA MANN

Open Flow and SDN Controllers

Syllabus a

Open Flow Overview, The Open Flow Switch, The Open Flow Controller, Open Flow Ports,
Message Types, Pipeline Processing, Flow Tables, Matching, Instructions, Action Set and List, Open
Flow Protocol, Proactive and ‘Reactive Flow, Timers, Open Flow Limitations, Open Flow
‘Advantages and Disadvantages, Open v Switch Features, Drawbacks of Open SDN, Introduction to
SDN controller. ' .

Contents |

2.1 Definition . —

2.2 ‘Traffic Matching, Pipeline Processing and Flow Table Navigation
2.3 OpenFlow Messages | a 7 .

2.4. Software-Defined Networking (SDN) Controller .

2.5 OpenFlow Controllers |

2.6 SDN and OpenFlow Use Cases

2.7 Mininet |

2.8 FloodLight

2.9 — Implementing Software-Defined Network (SDN) based Firewall
2.10 OpenFlow Protocol |
2.11 Open v Switch Features

2.12 Open SDN

2.13 Pros and Cons of SDN Controller

2.14 Review Questions with Answers

(2-1)

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 17 =====

Software Defined Networks

Definition

OpenFlow (OF) is measured a pioneering Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
standard. It was first described as the communication protocol in SDN architectures that
let the SDN controller to interact freely with network devices like switches, hubs and
routers, both physical and virtual based systems, in order to better adapt to changing

business requirements.

Openflow Architecture —

2-2 Open Flow and SDN Controtters

a "Fig. 2.1.1: OpenFlow Switch
The OpenFlow switch is also programmed to:
1) Establish associated reason packets from an ingress port supported a varied packet
header fields; .
2) Method the packets in varied ways that, together with modifying the header
3) Drop or push the packets to a selected egress port or to the OpenFlow Controller.
The OpenFlow instructions sent from an OpenFlow Controller to an OpenFlow switch
are organised into "flows." Every each flow has a packet fields, a flow priority, different.
counters, packet process directions and packet match fields. Tables are used to arrange
the flows. Before leaving on a related egress port, an associated incoming packet is
additionally handled by flows in several "pipelined" tables. The OpenFlow protocol
standard is rapidly changing with unleash 6 due to the most recent version at the time
this publication was published. The OpenFlow Network Architecture consists of three
layers : |
1) One or more OpenFlow virtual and / or physical switches
2) One or two OpenFlow controller or controllers

3) One or more OpenFlow application or applications.

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS © - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 18 =====

software Defined Networks 2-3 Open Flow and SDN Controllers
TT EY SE es

For an illustration, refer Fig, 2.1.2 below.

plane

. Network mgmt,

Data plane

Network
switches

NoviFlow
NoviWare

‘Fig. 2.1.2 : The OpenFlow architecture source : NoviFlow, Inc. -

The OpenFlow controller keeps up with the neighbourhood. state graph of the
OpenFlow switches, the OpenFlow protocol communications channels to the OpenFlow
switches and offers a northbound API to the OpenFlow applications. The northbound
API, which allows OpenFlow applications to scan the network's status and give
instructions to the network to carry out various activities, may also be thought of as an
abstraction of the network. -

A real world OpenFlow capable network could incorporates solely OpenFlow switches
or a mix of OpenFlow switches and ancient switches and routers. The latter network sort
is termed Associate in Nursing overlay network. Some OpenFlow applications would
require solely partial readying of OpenFlow switches whereas others require a network
consisting of solely OpenFlow switches. |

Flow and Group Table

Using the OpenFlow switch protocol, the controller will add, update and delete flow
entries in flow tables, each reactively (in response to packets) and proactively.

Reactive Flow Entries square measure created once the controller dynamically learns
wherever devices square measure within the topology and should update the flow tables
on those devices to create end-to-end property. For instance, since the switches in a very
Pure OpenFlow surroundings square measure merely forwarders of traffic, all rational
logic should initially be determined and programmed by the controller. So, if a bunch on
ig

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 19 =====

Software Defined Networks 2-4 Open Flow and spn Controter

switch A has to discuss with a bunch of switch B, messages are going to be Sent to th, !
controller to search out a way to get to the current host. The controller can learn the hos
mack address tables of the switches and the way they connect, programming the logic
into the flow tables of every switch. This is often a reactive flow entry.

Proactive flow entries are square measure programmed before traffic arrives, 1 it’s
already noted that two devices have to or must not communicate, the controller will
program these flow entries on the OpenFlow endpoints before time.

Traffic Matching, Pipeline Processing and Flow Table Navigation

Packet
out

Output
“port -

Fig. 2.2.1; Pipeline processing

Every OpenFlow switch in an associated OpenFlow network has a minimum of oné
flow table and a set of flow entries inside that table. These flow entries provide fields for
matching packets, counters and instructions for using them. | |

Since there will usually be more than one flow table, it is important to remember that
matching begins with the first flow table and should continue with subsequent flow f
tables in the pipeline. The packet can start in table zero and check the entries that have
Priority support first. Most important might be equal to first (e.g. 200, then 100, then I}
The goto statement instructs the packet to go to the table indicated by the directives if the

flow must go to yet another table.

This pipeline process can happen in two stages, 01) ingress process and 02) egre®

process, |
eee ee
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an uo-thrust for knawledra

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 20 =====

are Defined Networks
Softw — 2-5 Open Flow and SDN Controllers

If an identical entry is found, the directions related to the precise flow entry are dead.

If no match is found during a flow table, the end result depends on the configuration of
the table-miss flow entry.

’ Ingress
Egress

Fig. 2.2.2 : Table-mlss flow entry

® _
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 21 =====

Software Defined Networks 2-6 Open Flow and SDN Controtters

The Table-miss flow entry is the last in the table, has a priority of 0 anda Match o |
anything. It’s like a catch-all and the actions to be taken depend on how you configure i,
You can forward the packet to the controller over the OpenFlow Channel, or coulg drop
the packet, or continue with the next flow table.

OpenFlow Ports
OpenFlow ports will area unit the network interfaces for passing packets between

OpenFlow process and the rest of the network. OpenFlow switches connect logically ty

every different via their OpenFlow ports.

There are three types of ports that are associated with OpenFlow switch:
1) Physical ports :

2) ‘Logical ports

3) Reserved ports.

1. Physical ports

Physical ports are switch-defined ports that are associated with a switch's hardware
"interface. Essentially, this doesn't have to imply matching the mapping of OpenFlow
physical ports to hardware-defined local area network interfaces on the switch
OpenFlow swiiches. will. contain physically virtualized physical ports that
correspond to some fictitious representation of a physical port. This resembles the
method used in encryption environments to virtualize hardware network ports.

2. Logical ports

_ Logical ports are switch-defined ports that don't match up with. the switch's
hardware interfaces, Examples of this include loopback interfaces, tunnels and LAGs.
When packets are received on logical ports that require communication with the
controller, both the logical port and the underlying physical port must be reported to

the controller. This is the only difference between physical ports and logical ports. 4

packet related to a logical port may have an additional pipeline field called Tunnel

3. Reserved ports

The generic forwarding beh

— aviours specified by the OpenFlow reserved po
include harming the controll

er, flooding, or forwarding improperly utilising n™
OpenFlow methods, such as "regular" switch operation.

Needed reserved ports come ina variety of flavours, including ALL, CONTROLLER
TABLE, IN PORT, ANY, UNSET and LOCAL. The OpenFlow channel used fo!

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONs® - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 22 =====

software Defined Networks 2-7 Open Flow and SDN Controllers

communication between the switch and controller is represented by the
CONTROLLER port.

Traditional and FLOOD ports are also present in hybrid setups to allow

communication between the OpenFlow pipeline and the switch's hardware pipeline.

OpenFlow-Only Switches vs. OpenFlow-hybrid Switches

Local switch

OpenFlow control plane

Port 8 Port 9

. I .
NORMAL
VLAN 50 --~----» VLAN 60

Maich : Port &
Action : Output to the
NORMAL port

Fig 2.2.3: OpenFlow switches

There are two types of OpenFlow switches : oO

¢ OpenFlow-only
° OpenFlow-hybrid. |

Switches that solely support OpenFlow a are "dumb switches," as they have no local
decision-making capabilities and merely a data/forwarding plane. There is no other way
to handle packets but through the OpenFlow pipeline. —

OpenFlow-hybrid switches provide both standard Ethernet switching and OpenFlow
functionality. This implies that you’may engage with the OpenFlow pipeline using a
variety of classification algorithms while employing conventional L2 Ethernet switching,
VLAN separation, L3 routing, ACLs, and QoS processing via the switch’s local control
plane.

A switch may have half of its ports set up for conventional routing and switching and
the other half for OpenFlow. An OpenFlow controller would handle the OpenFlow
Portion, while the local switch control plane would control the other portion. In order to
allow traffic to move between these pipes use ofa NORMAL « or FLOOD reserved port is

required ,

®
TERUNICAL DHREICATIONS = an un-theust for knniiladan

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 23 =====

- Open Flow and
Software Defined Networks 2-8 P Sb N Controle,

OpenFlow Messages |
OpenFlow Protocol supports 3 message types, each with their own setup of Sub-typos,
e Controller-to-switch
e Asynchronous

e Symmetric

Controller-to-switch messages
¢ Controller-to-switch messages are initiated by the controller and used to directly
manage or inspect the switch. These messages include :
e Features : The switch must ask for identity
.© Set and check ‘ configuration parameters i in configuration
° Modify-State, commonly known as “flow mod," is a tool for adding, removing and
changing flow/group entries.
¢ Get statistics using Read - States.

When a packet leaves’ the controller, the switch receives a message with either T the
whole packet or the buffer ID.

Barrier - The controller uses Tequest or reply messages to check that message
requirements have been satisfied and to receive notifications.

« Set the role of an OpenFlow channel using a role - request.

Set an extra filter on any asynchronous messages it wishes to receive on the
OpenFlow Channel using the asynchronous - configuration command.

Asynchronous messages.

e The switch starts asynchronous messages, which are. then utilised to inform the
controller of network occurrences and changes to the switch's status. Among these
messages are :

d

e Transfer control of a packet to the controller via packet-in.
e Flow-removed : This tells the controller that the flow has been stopped. ,
e Port status: Alert the controller that the switch has failed. ”

e Error: Alert controller toissues -

Symmetric messages

e Symmetric messages are sent on their own: initiative, either by the switch or the
controller. Among these messages are :

eee

®. - :
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ’- an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 24 =====

yare Defined Networks 2-9

soft Open Flow and SDN Controllers

» Hello: Exchanged messages or keep - alive messages between the controller and
switch.

e Echo: Sending an echo from either a switch or a controller verifies that the link is
active and is used to monitor latency or bandwidth.

¢ Experimenter : A common technique for OpenFlow switches to provide ‘more
functionality inside the OpenFlow message type space is using experimenter.

OpenFlow Benefits vs OpenFlow Drawbacks

OpenFlow benefits are as follows :
1, Automatic discovery.
2, Easier implementation of network - wide forwarding policies. .

3. Vendor independence.

_OpenFlow drawbacks are as follows :

1. OpenFlow will not replace routing protocols; an SDN/OpenFlow controller must
reinvent all the wheels (scalability, resilience, reliability, auto-discovery, fast
convergence) and provide added value.

2. Even though there is single standard (with four versions), there : are many vendor-
specific implementation details.

3. Advanced packet classification / processing is still done in software. Existing
hardware only supports a couple of 1000 entries in hardware forwarding tables

(TCAM).

OpenFlow Protocol

_ The OpenFlow (OF) protocol may be a customary in Software - Defined Networking
(SDN) design. This protocol defines the communication between SDN controller and also
the network device / agent. Before delving deep into the OpenFlow protocol, here may be
a background on SDN. .

Before moving more, the term “switch” denotes any network device capable of ©
exploitation OF protocol and not the Layer a pair of device. In layer a pair of the OSI ©
model, layer a pair of refers to the information layer wherever the standard switches
Teside, They're chargeable for forwarding local area network ‘frames’ on the wire. Many
options like VLANS, STP and port aggregation are often enforced at layer

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrist for brinuttacae

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 25 =====

2-10 Open Flow and SDN Contro

Software-Defined Networks hen

[24] Software-Defined Networking (SDN) Controller

All ancient networking devices like router and switches uses distributed managemn |
plane. However newer model of networking i.e., Software-Defined Networking (SDy)
uses centralized management plane. Distributed management plane implies thar
management plane of all networking devices lies at intervals the device itself,

Each device have their own management plane to manage knowledge plane. Ih
centralized management plane system, there's a tool that contains management plane og
all devices. This device management the activities of information plane of all networking
‘devices at the same time. This device is named Controller or SDN controller.

The following figure shows a model of controller primarily based networking.

Network device . Network device ; Network device

Fig. 2.4.1: Controller based network model

Southbound Interface :
e In SDN, all networking devices should be connected to-controller in order that it
will regulate information planes of all devices. Once drawing design of network,
typically the network designer places networking devices below controller.
Currently in line with map conventions, interface between: controller and
networking devices lies to south of controller, Hence, these interfaces square
measure known as south Interface, . .
e Southbound interface is associate in: nursing interface between a program on
controller and a program on networking device. Note that these interfaces we tend
to square measure discussing square measure code interface not physical one.

.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS  - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 26 =====

software Defined Networks 2-91
OpenFlow Controllers

An OpenFlow controller is a type of SDN controller that uses the OpenFlow Protocol.
_ The calculated point in software-defined networking is an SDN controller (SDN ). The
OpenFlow protocol is used by an OpenFlow Controller to connect and arrange network
components (such as switches and routers) in order to determine the optimum path for

a traffic. A controller can also leverage additional SDN protocols, including
ang, OpFlex, and NetConf, to mention a few.

Open Flow and SDN Controllers

yy managing all connections between applications and devices, SDN controllers may
simplify network administration. They can effectively monitor and modify network flows
to accommodate changing requirements. Administrators-may more precisely and
dynamically regulate network traffic when the network control plane is implemented in
software as opposed to firmware. Information is relayed by an SDN controller to the ©
switches / routers, applications and business logic (through southbound APIs) (via
northbound APIs). |

SDN and OpenFlow Use Cases

When choosing an SDN controller, IT organizations should assess the OpenFlow
functionality supported. by the controller, as well as the vendot roadmap. IT
organizations should recognize obtainable functionality and make sure newer versions of
OpenFlow and optional features are supported (for example, IPv6 support is not part of
the OpenFlow v1.0 Standard, however, it is part of the v1.3 Standard). |

A sampling of OpenFlow controllers include :

1. NOX : A network of OpenFlow switches may be managed and seen by using the
network operating system NOx. It offers a variety of sample controller apps and
supports concurrent Python and C++ applications.

2. Beacon : Beacon is a Java-based OpenFlow controller that is extendable. It was

- constructed using an OSGI framework, enabling OpenFlow apps to be loaded,
updated, and launched at runtime without disconnecting switches.

3. Trema : Trema, originally known as Helios, is an extendable OpenFlow controller
developed by NEC in the Ruby and C programming languages with academics in
mind. Additionally, it offers a programmatic framework for doing integrated
experiments.

_4, NEC ProgrammableFlow : Trema serves as the framework ° for NEC's
ProgrammableFlow. In addition to providing a network-wide programmable
interface to integrate the deployment and management of network services with

eee

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS " - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 27 =====

oo, 4

Software Defined Notworks _2- 12 ____ open Pipi and SON Conte,

the rest of the IT infrastructure, ProgrammableFlow automates and stream},
netivork administration for increased business agility. First to receive certificati,.
from the Open Networking Foundation was ProgrammableFlow. . :

5. Lumina OpenDaylight Nitrogen is supported by the Lumina SDN controller 7.16,
whieh was published by Lumina in December 2017. (the seventh OpenDayliot:
platform), Additionally, it supports Karaf 4 from OpenDayLight, which enabj:,
users to select the controller's protocols and services. |

6. BigSwitch : Its Big Cloud Fabric controller creates a virtual private cloud based ¢,
SDN controller abstractions and open networking hardware switches.

Mininet

a, | cp
. | :

3
Poon anne AAS AAU

Fig. 2.7.1 : Topology creatod using Minladit (an open source tool to create Mininet topologles)

One can instantly produce realistic virtual networks deploying controllers, switches |
and hosts exploitation Mininet. And experiment with them to your heart's content '0

as ‘ . ™,
run real kernel, application and switch code on one machine, whether or not on 4 vM
the cloud or native.

Mininet is open supply code that's accustomed simulate a code outlined network (SDN)
and its compatible controllers, switches and hosts. It comes in handy for networking |
enthusiasts and beginners to induce some expertise in operating with the qu ° |
growing SDN technology. To place it merely, a SDN separates the management plan
from the information forwarding plane, creating network devices like switches 4"

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS. -an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 28 =====

software Defined Networks 2-13 Open Flow and SDN Controllers

routers absolutely programmable and hence, the network behaves in step with the
users’ needs. By default, Mininet provides OVS switches and OVS controllers.

» Mininet supports the Openflow protocol, that provides an interface between the
management plane and therefore the knowledge forwarding plane. Openflow
protocols are accustomed management the packet flow as per the API written on the
controller. However, it's the support to put in other / preferred SDN controllers and |
switches rather than the defaults. The first feature that distinguishes SDN devices from
ancient network devices is that the scope for customising protocols and functions.

« Mininet conjointly has support for a range of topologies and ensures the provision of

custom topologies. The interface (command line interface) provided by Mininet is
comfy to use when a touch of apply. |

FloodLight . —
Itis an Open source SDN controller platform with following Features
1. Apache-licensed 2, OpenFlow protocol ~~
3. Javabased A ‘Enterprise class controller . .

Application tier

Virtual : Circuit 5 . eh a
switch || — pusher More floodlight applications _

OpenFlow , OpenFlow
hypervisor - physical
switches switches

Fig. 2.8.1: FloodLight overview

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 29 =====

NJ

: } Ny

Basic functionality
1. Topology discovery
¢ LLDP protocol
2. Flow installation / deletion -
¢ Install / modify / delete a flow on a switch
° Flow is defined as all packets with the same match
3. Stats query
e Packet counts
° Flow counts

¢ Port stats query — Etc

Implementing Software-Defined Network (SDN) based Firewall

A firewall is a organization that secures incoming network packets, which come from
various sources, as well as outgoing network packets. It can observe and control the flow

of data which comes into the network from different sources and works on the basis of
predefined rules ° .

Internet Firewall

SOSEIN : .
Home or business network
| Fig. 2.9.1 : Traditlonal firewall
The following is the comparison between Traditional vs SDN based firewalls
Internal traffic is not seen and cannot be filtered by a traditional firewall.

2. The succeeding packets of the flow directly match the flow policy defined in the
controller. ,

The firewall policy is centrally defined and enforced at the controller.

‘An SDN based firewall works both as a packet filter and a policy checker.

The first packet goes through the controller and is filtered by the SDN firewall.
: TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 30 =====

S

oftware Defined Networks 2-15

Open Flow and SDN Controllers

Firewall
_ application.

Fig. 2.9.2 : SDN based firewall

Implementing an SDN based firewall

Networked computers are protected by a “firewall, which serves as‘a barrier by
obstructing dangerous network traffic that viruses and worms create. By creating
code for an SDN controller in an SDN-based firewall. The code is created

particularly to add firewall rules to a POX controller.

Installation of Mininet and the POX controller are required for the operation of an
SDN-based firewall. Both tools are accessible for free and are open source.
topologies-on-a-single-machine/ can be used for setup and installation.

The layer 2 firewall works in conjunction with the physical address-based module
on POX runtimes. The. firewall application receives a list of MAC address pairs,
often known as an Access Control List (ACL). When a link is established between
the controller and the switch, the application installs static data. a few firewall rule -
examples

Block all traffic originating from host 10.1.1.1 at the given switch :
00-00-02-00-00-00-00-00 CAPS srcip = 10.1.1.1

Block all traffic originating from host 10.1.2.2 at the designated switch if the
packet's TOS is tagged with 32 and it is headed for 10.1.3.1:

00-00-03-00-00-00-00-00 BLOCK dstip = 10.1.3.1 tos = 32 srcip = 10.1.2.2

Redirect traffic intended for 10.1.2.1 and send it to 10.1.2.2 at the given switch :
00-00-01-00-00-00-00-00 DELETE 10.1.2.1 AND REDIRECT 10.1.2.2

. ® - "
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 31 =====

- Ope
Software Defined Networks 2-16 pon Flow and SDN Contr Ollers

¢ Mark the TOS field of each packet at the specified switch, with value 40
* 00-00-04-00-00-00-00-00 MARK srcipt = 10,1.1.1 TOS 40

Firewall execution in SDN
oe In the POX controller, check the MAC address against the firewall rules,
e If the ether type is LLDP or the packet's destination address is a bridge - filtereg’
address, is transparent = False. If so, DROPPING.
e The destination is multicast, right ? If so, then FLOOD.
¢ Install the flow table item in the switch so that it will be utilised the next time a
packet identical to this one shows up. .
e Find a skeleton class file at pox / pox / misc / 12 firewall.py to get started with this,
In order to add your own logic later, you will need to edit this skeleton code as it is
presently not obstructing any traffic. Here a few restrictions to Prevent the packet

from coming from a particular IP. Place 12 firewall.py in the pox/pox/misc directory
and launch the POX controller as instructed to te

st the firewall../pox.py log.level -.
DEBUG forwarding. 12_firewall Ce |

¢ The above code runs the firewall on the POX controller and filters the traffic by the
tules specified in it. : .

After the connection between the controller and the switch is established, we can

verify the connectivity between all pairs of hosts by typing pingall in the Mininet

ugh a pair of hosts, you need to wait

ry

console. Note that when ping cannot get thro
for the timeout, which takes abotit 10 seconds

OpenFlow Protocol

The beauty of OpenFlow is that it's just a way for programmers to push whatever

flows they want by utilizing TCAM tables in existing vendor switches. With
OpenFlow, a switch may now be instructed to match on any field and perform an

action. This is policy-based routing on steroids for network administrators and

engineers. We may use a structured messaging protocol to express the policy and flow
rules to be put in TCAM. This allows us to decouple functionality and push a set of
flow policies from off board the switch, over a TCP connection, |

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 32 =====

Open Flow and SDN Controllers

2-17

software Defined Networks

JE;OIJOO O}

yeyeng YoY

vided (uur
Z/O Hod oO}
yoxoed pues

joxOng uoNnOY

Jayjo1UOS 0} Nd SI uonoy “IVOL U yojelu ou utes ul -yoxyoed

dayoot YIVOL

dnyoor WYOL

re ee
ee ee
rn ee

' 2/9 Pod O} PseAVOS Sf UONSY ~ NVOLL Ul YOJELU YM Ul - oye

TCAM matching

1

Fig. 2.10

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge .

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 33 =====

Software Defined Networks 2-18 Open Flow and SDN Contro

Hers

At the moment, switches, routers and firewalls all function at the L2 and L3
Some of those features are combined in hardware that is designed with a 5
purpose, such L3 switches. An access-list, a frequently used function, may match on
different layers of a packet's L2-L4 headers using TCAM (ternary content addressab,
memory). That TCAM memory can match (0), not match (1) (the binary is Paradoxical in

levels
Pecit

that case), or not care (wildcard), In a single clock cycle, parallel searches are Performeq

on each field or tuple. In hardware, this means very rapidly and at “line rate."

OpenFlow Proactive vs. Reactive

When using OpenFlow to engage TCAM in switches there are basically two modes of
operation : ,

1. Reactive flow instantiation :

The OpenFlow agent SW on the switch searches the flow tables when a new flow

enters it, either in the search ASIC if the switch is hardware or in the software flow table if

it is a virtual switch. If a match for the flow cannot be discovered, the Switch creates an |

OFP packet-in packet and sends it to the controller for instructions. Reactive mode reacts

to traffic, asks the OpenFlow controller for guidance and then creates a rule in the flow

table in line with the instruction. Since current hardware has absurdly high CPU counts,
reactive has a problem. Consider the iPhone 5 or a PowerPC computer from 2001. the
replication and encapsulation of the data, that tiny man has to do a DMA copy. Overa
few thousand packets per second, HW: switches other than NPUs or general-purpose

CPU vSwitches don't perform this. Most from some quite big, pricey chassis in the
hundreds and some in the tens. _ _

2. Proactive flow instantiation :

Instead of reacting to a packet, an OpenFlow controller may pre-fill the flow tables for
all probable traffic matches entering the switch: Take a look ata typical routing table from
today. Longest prefix matching ina prefix tree lookup will match the most exact route to
a target prefix. By predefining all of your flows and actions in the switches’ flow tables
beforehand, the packet-in event is prevented. All packets are sent at line rate by doing 4
straightforward flow lookup in the switches flow tables if the flow table is in TCAM:
Today's routing relies on the same method to fill its forwarding tables during “routing by

rumour." "Flood and spray" methods and layer 2 learning standards any delay resulting
from proactive flow.

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 34 =====

ware Defined Networks 3-19

soft Open Flow and SDN Controllers

OpenFlow Benefits

1, Easier implementation of network-wide forwarding policies.
9, Vendor independence.

3, Automatic discovery.

Fy ykv.s] OpenFlow Drawbacks

1. Even though there is single standard (with four versions), there are many vendor-
specific implementation details.

2. OpenFlow will not replace routing protocols; an SDN / OpenFlow controller must
reinvent all the wheels (scalability, resilience, reliability, auto-discovery, fast -
convergence) and provide added value.

3. Advanced packet classification / processing is still done in software. Existing
hardware only supports a couple of 1000 entries in hardware forwarding tables

(TCAM).

Open v Switch Features

Monitoring : Netflov,
sFlow, SPAN, RSPAN

eos Automated control:
-Q08: Traffic queuing CS OpenFlow, OVSDB
- and traffic shaping . mgmt. protocol

Fig. 2.11.1 : Open v Switch

Under the Apache 2 open source license, a multilayer software switch with the name
of Open vSwitch is accessible. Our goal is to set up a switch platform that is fit for

; )
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 35 =====

Software Defined Networks 2 - 20 Open Flow and SDN Controllers

production, provides standard administrative interfaces and leaves the forwarding
functions open to programmatic growth and control.

Open vSwitch is perfectly suited to function as a virtual switch in VM environments,
In addition to providing standard management and visibility interfaces to the vittual
networking layer, it was designed to make distribution over several physical servers
easier. Among the various Linux-based virtualization technologies ‘that Open vSwitch
supports are KVM and VirtualBox. Most of the code is written in platform-neutral ¢
making it easily adaptable to other contexts.The following functionalities are supported
by the most recent version of Open vSwitch :

1. Tunneling using Geneve, GRE, VXLAN, SIT and LISP.
Management of connection faults in 802. lag..
OpenFlow 1.0 and a variety of extensions. ; .
Database with transactional configuration and C and Python bindings.
Using a Linux kernel module for high-performance forwarding.
Common 802.1Q VLAN concept with access and trunk ports.
NIC bonding on the upstream switch, either with or without LACP.
Mirroring, NetFlow and sFlow(R) for improved visibility
Configuring QoS (Quality of Service) and policing -

Furthermore, Open vSwitch has the ability to operate entirely in userspace without the
use of a kernel module. This user space implementation should be easier to transfer than
the kernel-based switch. OVS can establish userspace connections to Linux or DPDK

devices. Please be aware that Open vSwitch on non-DPDK devices and with userspace
datapath i is considered experimental and suffers from performance penalties. .

[272] Open SDN

Software-Defined Networking (SDN) and Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)
have a enormous open source community, devoted to growing projects that encourag®

open standards. To better know open source, it’s significant to comprehend first what
open SDN entails.

po OND YM FY ND

® .
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 36 =====

ware Defined Networks _. 2-24

Soft Open Flow and SDN Controllers

Application
layer

API API

Control
layer

. OpenFlow

Infrastructure
layer

- Fig. 2.12.1 : SDN Architecture

Attributes of openness in SDN

SDN enables the programmability of the control plane and the abstraction of the
application and networking services in the infrastructure. By providing advantageous
features like achieving inoperability between physical and virtual devices and being
vendor - neutral, providing constant visibility of networking flows, having a single
management framework for all devices, being programmable and enabling automation,
SDN revolutionized networking.

Organizations that let anybody to join and freely use their code. as long as each
member contributes to the project have emerged with the goal of advancing networking
technology, The fundamental tenet of an open source community, '

Keep in mind that one or more of the following can be used to decide what is and i is
not Open. '

* Open Standards : Freely and usually offered specifications for hardware or
software developed and maintained through a collective process, like OpenFlow

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS  - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 37 =====

Software Dottned Notwoila go Bm

4.29 Gpon Flay ond COU CONG 00

_— oo Oren @ accessible for anyone to modif OF itnce;..,
¢ Open Source Hoflware | Source COUG access oh J TART Ove,

like Openstack and OpenDaylight
: ray ’ ACG P70) a ay Ols Toy elt rs
ADIs and SDKs: Application Program Interfaces (AVIs) act as tools for de Veloxir

NS

software applications, often dictating, how software sechanisra shuts

communicate with one another (not all AW’Is are open, consider Amazon Vie,

Services APIs); Software Development Kits (SDKs) are packages of pre - yritte

code that reduce the number of unique code developers have to write on their ov,

; several SDKs are available APIs, accessible for anyone to write into their ovr,
applications

¢ Open Hardware : Designs with open reference for calculate and networking
produets, like Open Compute Project

The above gives a glimpse into why many companies and organizations can label the

entity or its products as,“open.” However, when contemplating what is and isn’t “open,”
one must consider the degree or type of openness attributed to a certain product o:
company.

Disadvantages of SDN

It requires a change in the entire network infrastructure to implement SDN protocol
and SDN controller. It requires a complete reconfiguration of the network. This
increased cost due to reconfiguration. |

A new management tool needs to be procured and everyone should be trained to use it.
Security is a big challenge in SDN.
Needs Skillful trainer,

|22,53)] Pros and Cons of SDN Controller

e Businesses may utilise more than one

The fact that the centralised controller of SDN controllers is aware of all the available

network pathways and can direct packets de

, . - pending on traffic requirements is one of
their main advantages, The controlle

“may automatically change traffic flows and alert
network operators to crowded links due to its insight into the network

controller, adding a backup for redundancy and
they should. Three appears to be a popular number among both open source and for-

profit SDN alternatives. Due to this redundancy, the network will be able to function
even if communication is lost or the controller becomes vulnerable

Securing the controller is essential for any software - defined network because it serves

as a single point of failure. Owner of the controller has full control over the complete
process.

- On un-thrust for knowledqe

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 38 =====

yare Defined Networks 2.23

soft Open Flow and SDN Controllers

Firewall

Northbound
APIs .

Load balancer

Control layer
SDN controller

“Southbound
APIs (OpenFiow) ¢-

_ Infrastructure layer

Switch devices

Fig. 2.13.1 : The SDN controller resides between the application layer and infrastructure layer

Review Questions with Answers

Explain in detail openflow architecture (Refer section 2.1.1)
Write a notes on openflow switch. (Refer section 2.1.1)
Explain in detail three types of openflow ports. (Refer section 2.2.1)
With neat diagram explain pipeline processing. (Refer section 2.2) ;
Compare openflow benefits over openflow drawbacks. (Refer section 2.3.1)

Which three types of messages docs openflow protocol support . (Refer section 2.3) [Es
Define openflow protocol. (Refer section 2.3.2)
Explain SDN controller with neat diagram. (Refer section 2.4)

SON DoF WD >

i) i?
: :

QOO

TERUMIRFAL PLIREIGATIONS | = an rn.thrict far knnwladas

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 39 =====

| Unie I

nied
| Unie nt |

Data Centers

Syllabus

Data Center Definition, Data Center Demands (Adding, Moving, Deleting Resources, Failure
Recovery, Multitenancy, Traffic Engineering and Path Efficiency), Tunneling Technologies for the

Data Center, SDN Use Cases in the Data Center, SDN Solutions for the Data Center Network -
‘VLANs - EVPN- VxLAN-NVGRE © - |

Contents

3.1. Definition

3.2 Data Center Architecture : Key Design Components
3.3 The 4 Tiers of Data Centers |

3.4 Data Centre Demands

3.5 Tunneling Technologies for the Data Center

3.6 Virtual Local Area Network ( VLAN)
3.7 Ethernet VPN (EVPN) -
3.8 SDN Use Cases

3.9 Review Questions with Answers

(3-1) -

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 40 =====

Software Defined Networks 3-2 Data Cente;,
[Sd] Definition

e A data centre is a building that uses a sophisticated network, computing and Storap,
infrastructure to give shared access to applications and data. There are indy
standards to help with planning, building and maintaining data centre infrastructure,
and facilities to guarantee the data is highly accessible and safe. .

e A data centre is a physical location where computer systems are securely kept before
being used to store and exchange data for client systems to process. In a data centre
these computer systems frequently contain servers, data storage systems, networking
gear and security systems. | | ,

¢ A simple analogy to a video streaming service might be helpful to understand how a
data centre operates. The real video data is kept on a server that is actually housed ina
data centre when a user wishes to play an online video on a streaming service. The
video will be requested to be collected from the data centre by your laptop or phone
(the client systern) and once fetched, it will be played on the device. —

Types of Data Center

Data centres come in a variety of sizes, from a single small server room to large
clusters of buildings spread across a large area, but they all have one thing in common:
They are vital business assets where businesses frequently invest in and: implement the
most recent developments in data centre _networking, computing and storage
technologies. .

The contemporary data centre has changed from being a place where an on-premises
infrastructure was housed to one that links on-premises systems with cloud
infrastructures, where networks, applications and workloads are virtualized across man}
private and public clouds.

¢ Managed service data centers offer aspects such as data storage, computing and
other services as a third party, serving customers directly.

Cloud data centers are distributed and are sometimes offered to customers with
the help of a third-party managed service provider.

Enterprise data centers are typically constructed and used by a single organization
for their own internal purposes, These are common among tech giants.

Colocation data centers function as a kind of rental property where the space ant

resources of a data center are made available to the people willing to rent it.

TTT eee”

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS" - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 41 =====

So oftwar

e Defined Networks 3-3 Data Centers

oa yy Data Center Architecture : Key Design Components

It can be small or large, a data center design can never be whole without definite core
components that drive its functionality, starting from IT operations to the storage of data

and applications. These include:

1. Servers: These are computers that can handle large amounts of data and power

applications. They have high - performance CPUs, RAM and occasionally GPUs. A
single data centre rack is made up of many server modules. A solitary server or
rack may be devoted to a job, application, or particular client, depending on the use
case. In general, hundreds of servers working on diverse activities and applications
are housed in contemporary data centers.

Storage devices : Storage systems, such as Hard Disc Drives (HDDs), Solid - State
Drives (SSDs), or traditional robotic tape drives, take care of the servers’ storage
needs. In addition to providing simple access to end users and disaster recovery in
the event of cyber attacks or natural catastrophes, these units store business -
critical data and programmes with numerous backups. .

Infrastructure for networks and communications : This component links end-user
locations to the servers, storage systems and related datacentre services. It mostly

. consists of switches, routers, ADCs ‘and endless cables. that enable information

move around the data centre.

Security : This is the last element. It consists of components that are in charge of
preserving the security of the data and applications stored in data centres. The .
solutions might include complete network and application security solutions as
well as firewalls and encryption.

Data Center Architecture Components

Compute, storage and network are the three main categories of components found in

data centres. But in a contemporary DC, these elements merely represent the tip of the

iceberg, To fulfill the service level agreements of a corporate data centre, support
infrastructure is crucial.

Data Center Computing

The heart of a data centre is its servers. Applications executed on servers may employ
physical, virtual, distributed, containerized, or edge computing model processing and
memory, which is dispersed among remote nodes. Processors that are best suited for
the job must be used in data centres; for example, general-purpose CPUs may not be

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 42 =====

Software Dofined Networks 3-4 Data Center.
the ideal option for tackling Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine rearing (Mt
challenges.

e Data Center Storage
For both their own requirements and those of their clients, data centres house a lot of
private information. The amount of storage space available for local, remote, 9,
combined data backup rises as storage media costs decline. Data access times ate
getting faster because to developments in non - volatile storage. Additionally, software
- defined storage solutions improve staff productivity while operating a Storage
system, just like with everything else that is software - defined.

¢ Data Center Networks
To link servers to one other and to the outside world, datacenter network equipment
such as cables, switches, routers and firewalls are used. When designed and set
correctly, they can handle large amounts of traffic without sacrificing performance.
Core switches at the data center's edge link it to the Internet and a middle ageresate
layer connects the core layer to the access layer, which is where the servers are located,
On-premises networks now have the agility and scalability of cloud networks thanks
to innovations like hyperscale network security and software - defined networking.

[322] Data Center Support Infrastructure

A strong and dependable support infrastructure made up of power subsystems,
Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS), backup .generators, ventilation and cooling
equipment, fire suppression systems and building security systems protects data centres,
which are considered to be a key asset.

Data centre design, building and maintenance are aided by industry standards
provided by groups like the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA) and the
Uptime Institute. The Uptime Institute, for example, describes these four tiers :

Tierl: Basic Capacity must include a UPS.

Tler il: Redundant capacity and adds redundant power and cooling.

Ter Ill: Concurrently maintainable and ensures that
service without affecting production.

TlerIV: Fault tolerant, allowing
of failure.

any component can be taken out of .

any production capacity to be insulated from any kind

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 43 =====

software Defined Networks 3-5 Data Centers

Data Center Security

A - full zero trust analysis must be integrated into any data centre design in addition to
the building security measures that support a facility supporting data centers that were
previously described. To guarantee that they grow as necessary to meet the demands of
data centre networks, data centre firewalls, data access controls, IPS, WAF and their
contemporary counterpart Web Application and API Protection (WAAP) systems must be
correctly configured. Additionally, it's critical that you comprehend the security
procedures the cloud service provider or data storage provider uses for their own DC
pefore using them. Make the biggest security investment you can to protect your data.

[5] The 4 Tiers of Data Centers

An organisation must take into account a variety of elements while building up a data
centre in order to choose the best infrastructure, including its industry, location, finances
and the urgency of data access. To assist with this, a set of standards for data centre
design and execution were established in 2005 by. the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) and the Telecommunications Industry Association (TIA). These
standards assess data centres based on factors including

¢ Uptime, . : |

e Investment,

¢ Redundancy and

e Fault tolerance level

into four separate groups or tiers. oO -

1. Basic

¢ Only the most basic infrastructure, such as a single power ‘distribution channel,
specialised cooling equipment and UPS to servers, is carried by Tier 1 data centres.

* Office complexes or enterprises that do not require quick access to data should use
Tier 1 data centres. | So

* Due to the absence of gear designed for redundancy, these facilities also have the
lowest server hosting costs.

* These facilities are intended to provide an uptime of 99. 671 % annually with the
barest amount of redundancy, such as backups. They will also need to be shut

down for repairs and maintenance.

ee
® ;
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 44 =====

Software Defined Networks 3-6 Data Center

2. Redundancy capable . .
e With a single distribution line to servers, Tier 2 data centres are quite Similar b
basic ones, but they include some redundancy in the form of extra Capac;

components (chillers, energy generators and UPS) to handle the IT demand.

e This enables the removal of specific components for repairs and maintenance

"typically with minimal downtime.These data centres’ estimated yearly uptime jg
99.741 %. 7

3. Concurrently maintainable

° Tier 3 data centres have redundant Tier 2 capacity cooling, power and other
components (as well as two distribution pathways to the servers, one of which is
always active and the other is available as a backup). ;

In this manner, the servers are kept up even if one distribution method goes offline

for whatever reason by switching to the other. These data centres’ projected yearly
uptime is 99.982 %. .

4. Fault-tolerant

e These data centres are the most competent ones, having the greatest levels of
infrastructure redundancy at all levels.

¢ To achieve fault tolerance, Tier 4 data ‘centres feature numerous separate,

compartmentalised and "physically isolated systems as well as at least two
concurrently active distribution pathways.

¢ They maintain server operations despite planned and unforeseen interruptions and
guarantee annual uptime of 99.99 %, .

Data Centre Demands
[BA] Adding ° |
Adding datacenter is , adding new data centre in existing d

Moving

Moving specific assets from one data centre environment to another is known as a data
centre migration. A data centre relocation is another name for it.

atacenter

Moving an entire data centre to a new computer environment is referred to as data
center migration. Migration of one or more applications from one computing
environment to another is referred to as application migration. Moving particular
collections of data from one storage system to another is referred to as data migration.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 45 =====

ae
oftware Defined Networks
50

Deleting Resources

Data Centers

This operation removes a data center, This c
properties or resources are assigned to it.

gaa jaa Failure Recovery

Anything that endangers the Operations of a company is a failure. Each company
area's continuity planning procedure should be integrated with your Failure recovery

plan. To ensure overall process, technology and application preparedness, defined
recovery point and recovery time objectives must be established. |

an only remove a data center when no

With a business continuity and failure recovery plan in place, one can lessen the effects
of extreme weather events and rise to the occasion in the event that your data centre
sustains structural damage, water, wind, or fire.

Maintaining technical operations and ‘Speedy business operations restoration are the
objectives of a failure recovery strategy.

Five effective and efficient: steps to data center failure recovery are:

e Understanding the impact of a failure on your organization as a whole |

Pre-determining failure recovery team members

¢ Creating failure recovery plan

Determining Recovery Time Objective (RTO) and Recovery Point it Objective (RPO)

Testing disaster recovery plan .

Bas] Multitenancy

Colocation data centers, commonly referred to as Multi-Tenant Data Centres (MTDCs),
are places where businesses can rent space to host their data. MIDCs offer the area and
networking tools needed to link a company to service providers for a reasonable fee.
Businesses can hire a variety of items to suit their needs, from a server rack to a fully
functional module. The business advantages of a data centre are made available through
the scalability of consumption without the high cost.

Advantages of a multi - tenant data center

¢ Implementation and shared infrastructure efficiency
* Cost control and operational efficiency
* Outsourcing infrastructure needs

* The true agility of a multi - tenant data center

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 46 =====

Software Defined Networks 3-8 Date cont
Traffic Engineering |

Traffic Engineering (TE) isnecessary for appropriate distribution of the network load

as well as exploiting the path diversity

Traffic Engineering Challenges
“e Scale
— Many switches, hosts and virtual machines
e Churn |
~ Large number of component failures
— Virtual Machine (VM) migration
¢ Traffic characteristics
- High traffic volume and dense traffic matrix
- Volatile, unpredictable traffic patterns
e Performance requirements
— Delay - sensitive applications

- Resource isolation-between tenants

Traffic Engineering Opportunities
e Efficient network.
- Low propagation delay and high capacity
° Specialized topology
— Fat tree, Clos network, etc.
- Opportunities for hierarchical addressing
¢ Control over both network and hosts
~ Joint optimization of routing and server placement
- Can move network functionality into the end host
¢ Flexible movement of workload
~ Services replicated at multiple servers and data centers
- Virtual Machine (VM) migration |

Tunneling Technologies for the Data Center

ue are a several number of tunneling technologies which are used in the data center
and s ;
ome of are data center - oriented tunneling technologies predate SDN

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS" - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 47 =====

etworks - .
ene pefined N 3-9 Data Centers

Tu ~ ansling methods are

, Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network(VXLAN)
Network Virtualization using Generic Routing Encapsulation(NVGRE)
Stateless Transport Tunneling(STT).

4, Virtual eXtensible Local Area Network(VXLAN)

Original host dest and
source and payload

24-bit :
Network identifier .

“y , Qo.
“oy
Zu
; $4
Sa
o
“Be 2B.
oy ae =
oe . Ro D
oul : ~ OSE
“O ) ESS
‘a cog
pews co
os ag
Qo.
ba a Oe
-Q noD
< Oc
= O5S8s
oa SEZ g
2 . Sag 5
3 50% ¢
2) oge ®
Ys a

Fig, 3.5.1 : VXLAN packot format

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 48 =====

Software Defined Networks

The VXLAN technology has bee

ease the limit

n developed by VMware and Cisco, as a Means ty
ations and inflexibility of networking technology. Some of the Main

characteristics of VXLAN are:

VXLAN tunnels are stateless.
VXLAN segment end points are the switches that perform the encapsulation and

are called VIEPs.

VXLAN packets are unicast between the two VTEPs and use UDP over IP Packet
formats.

It is UDP-based. The UDP port number for VXLAN is 4789.

VXLAN utilizes MAC-in-IP tunneling.

Each virtual network or overlay is called a VKLAN segment.

VXLAN segments are identified by a 24 bit segment ID, allowing for up to 224
(approximately 16 million) segments. .

VXLAN claims that the technology helps with network load balancing. The values of
several packet fields, including the destination and source port numbers, are used to

determine a large portion of the load balancing inside the data centre network. A smooth
distribution function for load balancing with the network is produced as a result of the
fact that the source port of the UDP session is determined by hashing other fields of the

flow.:

.2, Network Virtualization Using GRE (NVGRE)

Microsoft was the main developer of the NVGRE technology, while Intel, Dell and
Hewlett-Packard also made contributions. NVGRE has a few key properties, including:

¢ NVGRE tunnels, like GRE tunnels, are stateless.

NVGRE packets are unicast between the two NVGRE end points, each running on
a switch. . |
NVGRE utilizes the header format specified by the GRE standard .

NVGRE utilizes MAC-in-IP tunneling,

Each virtual network or overlay is called a virtual layer two network.

NVGRE virtual networks are identified by a 24 bit Virtual Subnet Identifier,
allowing for up to 224 (16 million) networks,

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 49 =====

Data Centers

_ Outer payload 2

“GRE header

Virtual |
“Subset

riginal packet.

||" eytooa

Source / Dest ' Network identifier Original host dest and
MAC and IP of source and payload
switch tunnel}

endpoints

Fig. 3.5.2 : NVGRE packet format

The format of an NVGRE packet is displayed in Fig. 3.5.2 Similar to VXLAN, the outer
header includes the MAC and IP addresses necessary to deliver a unicast packet to the
destination switch, which serves as the end point of a virtual tunnel. Recall that UDP was
the IP protocol used for VXLAN. The IP protocol value for NVGRE is 0x2F, which
denotes GRE, a distinct IP protocol that belongs tothe same category as TCP or UDP. As
a result, neither source nor destination TCP nor UDP ports are shown in the diagram.
Following the outer header is the NVGRE header, which provides an NVGRE Subnet
Identifier with a length of 24 bits that is adequate for around 16 million networks.

3. Stateless Transport Tunneling (STT)

_ Amore recent innovation in the realm of tunneling methods for network virtualization
is Stateless Transport Tunneling (STT). Nicira served as its principal sponsor at first. STT
has a number of key properties, including : 7

¢ STT utilizes MAC-in-IP tunneling. =

‘© The general idea of a virtual network exists in STT, but is enclosed in a more
general identifier called a Context ID. | ——

¢ SIT packets are unicast between tunnel end points, utilizing TCP in the stateless

manner associated with TSO. This means that jt does not use the typical TCP

windowing scheme, which requires state for TCP. synchronization and flow

control.
© STT context IDs are 64 bits, allowing for a much larger number of virtual networks
and a broader range of service models. |
* SIT attempts to achieve performance gains over NVGRE and VXLAN by
leveraging the TCP Segmentation Offload(TSO) found in the Network Interface
Cards(NICs) of many servers. TSO is a mechanism implemented on server NICs
which allows large packets of data to be sent from the server to the NIC ina single

® .
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS | -an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 50 =====

3-12

Software Defined Networks Data Centers

send request, thus reducing the overhead associated with multiple smal]
. Co ; er

requests. .
e STT,as the name implics, is stateless.

- Original ‘host dest and
source and payload

- 64-bit
Context identifier

Port

— STTtce
= 7471"
*= Currently

Source / Dest
MAC and IP of
switch tunnel
endpoints

Fig. 3.5.3 : STT packet format

tu An SIT packet's format is depicted in Fig, 3.5.3. The outer header of each of the
nneling protocols covered here includes the MAC and IP addresses necessary to deliver

. Ko)
TECHNICAL PIIBL ICATIONS © - an un-thrist for knowledae

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 51 =====

yee
he
.

50 aware Defined Networks 3-13

unicast packet to the destin
a

Data Centers
ation switch, which serves as a VTEP

, . The IP protocol value
fot VXLAN was UDP, while NVGRE's IP protocol value was GRE. TCP is the IP protocol
shat STT uses. Although the TCP port number for STT has not yet been officially
established, the value 7471 has been employed. There is enough room for as many virtual
networks as necessary in the STT header, which comes after the outer header and

contains a STT Context Identifier of 64 bits in length that can be partitioned and utilized
for various purposes.

[SG] Virtual Local Ares Network (VLAN)

A Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) is a virtualized link that unites various —
network nodes and devices from several LANs into a single logical network. |

Types of VLAN

Virtual local area networks are now essential for businesses with intricate networking
infrastructures. Organizations need technologies that let them partition their networks to _
boost security, scale them and reduce latency. VLANs allow several LANs and their
associated devices to communicate via wireless internet, whereas LAN is used to link a
group of devices, such as PCs and printers, to a server via cables. The five different forms -
of virtual networks are described below : - _ .

¢ Virtual local area network for management : A smaller network made to assist in
controlling device traffic, application legging and monitoring. The increased.
network security is the main benefit of adopting this network. By limiting access
and routing all regular traffic to other virtual networks, it can lessen the effects of
broadcast radiation and make the network safer.

* Voice virtual local area network : This form of network, which is set up to carry
voice traffic, aids in bandwidth preservation and VoIP quality improvement. It can
be utilised to control traffic produced by VoIP hardware or software, including IP
phones, VoIP endpoints and voice systems. Most of the time, high transmission
priority is provided to this form of network above other network traffic. —

- © Native virtual local area network : A theory used to conventional systems or
hardware that does not allow VLANs. In order to transport untagged data
produced by a system or device configured with the native VLAN via switch port,
this network acts as a common identifier on the opposing ends of the trunk links.

* Default virtual local area network : Until they are assigned to other networks, such
aS Voice or management virtual networks, a default virtual network contains all the

ee
7 TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledae

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 52 =====

Software Defined Networks

3-14

e default virtual network enables connections between ma
an

access ports. Th
this network cannot be changed in name or removed.

devices. Furthermore,
Data virtual local area network : Divides the network's users and gadgets into tie

main categories. Voice or management traffic cannot be carried on this network, },

is set up to exclusively carry user-generated data. Administrators can STOUD users
on this network even if they aren't all linked to the same network switch.

Advantages of VLAN

VLAN has a number of benefits, including easier administration, better performance,

more flexibility and more.

1.

Saves Costs : Workstations or other devices connected to a specific VLAN can
communicate with one another via switches, doing away with the need for routers to
send and receive data on computer networks from locations outside the virtual LAN.
Due to the enormous external data interchange, routers might create bottlenecks and
generate security issues. Switches, on the other hand, offer less features than a router
but can communicate with the network's devices and effectively handle the data load.
This set-up and configuration can lower. your company's router investment costs ‘and
lower overall network latency. . |

. Simplified administration and enhanced security : Virtual LANs don't need intensive

administrative oversight. You can limit, alter, climinate, update, or adjust access
restrictions and permissions privileges on these networks. You can separate systems
and devices into different LAN segments to guarantee security if you need to grant
access to a certain set of users. Virtual LANs don't require reconfiguration if the .
systems, user groups, or devices connected to a particular network are moved. Your
company will be able to save money, time and resources in this way.

. Offer greater flexibility : Physical networks are less versatile than virtual LANs. They

are simple to set up, update and assign based on protocol, port and subnet
requirements. You may communicate with your team and exchange data more easily

because these networks don't depend on being close to other devices or on physical
connections like wires and cables,

Ethernet VPN (EVPN)

EVPN gives big businesses a standardized framework for controlling their campus

and data centre networks, Scale, simplicity, agility and effective Layer 2 and Lay ere

‘Retwork connectivity are all supported by EVPN - architecture, which also lo
OpEx(operationa] expenditure) expenses.

wers

sae

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIons” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 53 =====

(phy
it ma

bayer 2 and Layer 3 connection between endpo

goftWale

devices

Defined Networks 3-46

; Data Centers
A network's endpoint count is tising due to the

social media and collaboration tools, includ
Things (IoT) devices. EVPN separates the overla
sical topology) to allow endpoint freedom (
y retain an uniform underlay architecty

quickly expanding usage of mobile
ing the growing number of Internet
y network from the underlay network
virtual topology). By employing overlays,
re while having the flexibility to provide —
ints around the campus and data centres.

Benefits of EVPN

Understanding EVPN

The advantages of using an EVPN architecture include :

« Programmability makes it simple to automate

« Backwards and forwards compatibility is ensured by its open standards - based
design.

Layer 2 and Layer 3 connection that is efficient and integrated with control plane -

based learning .

¢ Simple network scalability depending on business requirements

¢ Get safely isolate traffic via network segmentation inside and across several
campuses and data centres. . oe

¢ Reduced fault domain improves network dependability. |

¢ MAC address mobility offers easy but flexible deployment options.

¢ With loop-free technology, spanning tree protocol is not as necessary. (STP)

¢ The network bandwidth is entirely used by active’- active redundant connections.

In conventional Layer 2 networks, flooding is used to spread reachability information
in the data plane. In networks using EVPN-VXLAN, this activity is moved to the
control plane. . a | .

EVPN is a Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) extension that enables the network to
convey Layer 2? MAC addresses and Layer 3 IP addresses as endpoint reachability data.
For the endpoint distribution of MAC and IP addresses, this control plane technology
employs MP-BGP, where MAC addresses are regarded as routes.

In addition, EVPN offers redundancy and multipath forwarding via an all-active

multihoming approach. A device or endpoint can establish connections with two or

Ore upstream devices and use all available links to forward traffic. Traffic continues
| vice or link malfunctions.

fo Move using the remaining operational links even if a de

; ® “A °
- TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an un-thrust far knowlode

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 54 =====

3-16

Software Defined Networks Data Centers

e Because MAC learning is now done in the control plane, layer 2 network flooding ; i
avoided. Between switches that offer EVPN-VXLAN, EVPN can support a Variety gf
data-plane encapsulation © schemes. VXLAN offers the overlay data - plane
encapsulation in EVPN designs. By encapsulating traffic and tunneling it over 4
physical network, network ov erlays are produced. In order to enable Layer 2 Virtual
networks or subnets that can transcend the underlying physical Layer 3 network, the
VXLAN tunneling protocol wraps Layer 2 Ethernet frames in Layer 3 UDP packets, A
VXLAN tunnel endpoint is the component that encapsulates and decapsulates VXLAN
(VTEP). Through the use of EVPN, VTEPs may communicate with one another
regarding the reachability of their endpoints.

[333] SDN Use Cases’

’ Software Defined Networking (SDN) has received a lot of interest from scientists and
academics over the last'several years. It is still an evolving technology that will eventually -
lead to the software - controlled networking architecture taking the place of the physical
network design. Typically, it turns out to be a flexible, reasonably affordable and dynamic
option. SDN's complexity enables it to meet applications’ high bandwidth requirements.

Despite the hoopla around software defined networking, few real-world applications
can be identified, but that doesn't imply there aren't any. Here are a few SDN use cases
that demonstrate its flexibility and ability to solve-certain network i issues.
¢ Hyper - converged storage / converged storage .

A design known as converged storage combines storage and computational power into

a single entity. They may be used to build platforms for workloads that are storage

server-, or even hybrid (storage-server)- focused. Several well-known data services

providers are starting to implement SDN while building programmable fabrics
between storage and data centre technologies. The goal is to achieve server and storage
virtualization agility through the use of virtualization. For instance, Edgenet ha
created the Programmable Flow SDN Ecosystem, which builds such a system using the

Openflow controller. To maintain optimal network effectiveness, they are also utilising

robust and effective switching.
* Video applications

When using it for their video and collaboration services, the unified communication
and border control provider Networks unveiled a new application for SDN. They
merged Juniper's network virtualization platform with their session border controle
which finally allowed providers the luxury of creating capacity for - see

ee

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

woes

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 55 =====

co
‘cerry

gotware 2

ned Networks .
elt 3-17 Data Centers

communication sessions. They have the c

apacity to guarantee that the QoS, or quality
of service levels, are also maintained th

anks to the utilization of SDN. According to the

an enterprise solution has given them far more control over
the network and best accommodates the dyn

corporation, using SDN as
amic agreements that.are essential to their
ine of work. —

orchestration of mobile network : services

Both SDN and NVF, or network functions virtualization, have invaded the networks of
mobile operators. In an effort to assure optimal resource utilization and dynamic
provisioning on the service orchestration, vendors have started to employ them to set
up their networks more meticulously. Vendors employing the combination of SDN
and NVF now have a lot of advantages, including the ability to provision lead times.

- Companies may now isolate their application logic, which was previously impossible,

which is another crucial factor.in choosing SDN-NVF. The design can adapt to the
requirements of the suppliers thanks to effective service orchestration and dynamic
resource consumption. Businesses assert that after adopting the architecture, they have
been able to cut down the lead times a lot and have also Teported quicker overall
performance of their platforms .

Data center networks’ scalability

Networks in data centres can also employ SDN to replace their wired infrastructure.
Currently, University of Illinois researchers are attempting to evaluate a new network
that has been established for a data centre using certain SDN switches. The researchers
are able to scale the bandwidth between servers; of course, this might have been done
in another way as well, but only after spending an excessive amount of money on
hardware. There are 13 Pica8 switches installed, totaling about 670 ports. Access
speeds will likely increase significantly if data networks are more often managed by

software since load balancing and capacity scaling will be guaranteed.

SDN in the Data Center .

The need for Software-Defined Networking (SDN) in the data centre is being driven by

Virtualization. More expectations are being placed on the data centre to provide more
flexibility, better performance and higher security as a result of growing demands on IT
“ployees to support cloud computing services, mobile apps, BYOD and big data
*Pplications. The infrastructure must be provided as a service powered by software,

*Voiding the need to constantly modify the physical data infrastructure to meet these

ee

® a.
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knawlade

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 56 =====

Software Defined Networks 3-18 Data Center

shifting demands. This is how the Software-Defined Data Centre was created (SDDo),
The SDDC must be expanded to include a software-controlled, switched network fabric,
or SDN, in order to provide a scalable ‘network architecture that can manage quickly

changing resource needs.

SDN Strategy to Centralize Management in the Data Center
Using an SDN policy to centralize management in the data center eases network

management in a variety of ways: .
1, Automated network provisioning ‘- Creating a programmable network enables you
to automate access to network resources. “Automated network provisioning
Network regulations and security protocols may be implemented, as well as
_ automated provisioning for remote locations and connections, using the SDN.
2. Traffic shaping - You may track and shape network traffic, including assigning
_ Quality of Service (QoS) to prioritise certain wide-area network traffic, using APIs
that expose the switching and controller fabric. It is also feasible to automate the
management of bandwidth, hop count and circuit usage, transferring backups and
other non-critical data traffic across underused..secondary lines. Throughput is
accelerated and becomes more predictable. |
3. Real-time monitoring - Centralized performance monitoring is also made possible
by routing SDN traffic through the data centre. Monitoring performance can assist
to increase dependability, improve performance and enable automated failover as
needed to solve latency concerns from distant data centres or cloud resources.
4. Reducing security risks - The SDN can.segregate network nodes that could be
' bringing malware into the company using virus detection and real-time
monitoring. To preserve performance, the SDN might instruct the network to
divert traffic around a compromised node or connection point.

Use Cases for SDN in the Data Center

In network architecture , as needed to meet any requirement by adding softs
controls and automation to manage almost any LAN or WAN asset. Without SDN in the
data centre, the following use cases would not be feasible :

* VM communication simplification - Without a software - defined strategy’
managing large data centres like the hyperscale data centres utilised by Amazon
and Google would be very challenging. Virtual Machines (VMs) can communicat?
with one another using SDN without worrying about the underlying fabric. This
lowers operational costs while streamlining VM deployment. ,

vare

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 57 =====

» Con

aot pefined Networks 3-49
$0

Data Centers

necting Enterprise data centres - The VM communications paradigm may be

extrapolated across many data centres, High bandwidth and low latency data flow

are managed dynamically by the SDN. The end result is quicker access and more

cost - effective network services running on the abstracted network fabric.

Integrating legacy networks - incorporating existing networks SDN improves
performance while streamlining administration of old systems for multi - tenant
data centres or legacy networks, Without spending money on staff time to alter
hardware configurations manually, network performance may be increased by
directing data traffic to load balancers and firewalls that have been deployed.
Wireless networking - SDN may be used for wireless networking to integrate
wireless data sources into the organisation. The current generation of wireless LAN
controllers offers improved security and access, so the SDN may include both
wireless and cable connections. Applying consistent security and access restrictions
over wired and wireless connections is possible with the help of the SDN
controller. ;

Review Questions with Answers -

1.
2.
3.
4,
5.
6.
7,
8.

ix

Define data centre. (Refer section 3.1).

What are the types of data centers. (Refer section 3.1)

Explain data center architecture components. (Refer section 3.2.1)
Which are the The 4 tiers of data centers. (Refer section 3.3) .

Explain data centre demands. (Refer section 3.4)

Write a note on traffic engineering (Refer section 3.4.6)

Explain tunneling technologies for the data center. (Refer section 3.5)
What Is Virtual Local Area Network (VLAN) (Refer section 3.6)

E>

QOO

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 58 =====

iM Awarnrannnannnnsnnnnannnannr ananansnt ese)
| Unie tv |

 aaasananaaer’
AMAAAAREASASAANN SAM RIARSAR AAA, .

SDN Programming

_ | Syllabus . | .
“|. Programming SDNs : Northbound Application Programming Interface, Current Languages and
Tools, Composition of SDNs - Introduction of Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) and Software
Defined Networks : Concepts, Implementation and Applications

Contents .
41 Northbound Application Programming Interface

4.2 Current Languages and Tools...

4.3. Composition of SDN — ;

4.4. Network Functions Virtualization 7

4.5 SDN Implementation

a, (4-1) | | : .

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 59 =====

Software Defined Networks

4 - 2 SCI! PLOT Er

[a] Northbound Application Programming Interface

°

The usual physical boundaries in a network like switches and routers are broken is

SDN architecture using Application Programming Interfaces (API). The AP] #::
resides in between the controller and the application layer in SDN is known 25 #2.
Northbound API.

Northbound API presents a network abstraction interface to the applications

a Na
ie

management systems at the top of the SDN stack.

Northbound API implemented by SDN controllers can be regarded as a network
abstraction interface to applications, easing network programmability, simplif«: ing
control and management tasks and allowing for innovation. In contrast to ihe
Southbound API, the Northbound API is not supported by an accepied siandard.

The northbound interface connects SDN applications to the controUer. An application
can request information, such as statistics and incoming connections from the
controller. An application can also send commands to the controller, in order to conzo!
the network, such as added or removed flow rules.

An application is designed for a specific task. Using the information obiained from tre
controller, possibly combined with information from other sources, it cam make =
informed decision about changing the network.

An example of an application which does all-of the above, is a data traffic application in
a data center. Fig. 4.1.1 shows schematic overview of a SDN application which
monutors data traffic usage.

A bookkeeping system holds the data traffic limit of a certain user. The application
keeps track of the data usage of this user via the northbound interface. Once it reaches
the limit found in the bookkeeping system, the application can install a rule blocking of
limiting data transfer from and to that user.

Limit reached
feedback

~ ‘Bookkeeping system

Data traffic
limit

Bandwidth ‘application

Northbound interface

Data traffic
information

Block transfer when
limit reached

Fig. 4.1.1 : Schematic overview of a SDN application which monitors data traffic usage

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 60 =====

gotware DE

e

fined Networks 4-3
SDN Programming

gach controller defines and implements its own version of the northbound interface
« bf * ,

se exact available information and commands differs greatly. This approach differs

from the southbound interface, where OpenFlow is dominant

The northbound interface 1s implemented in software, therefore it can have a more

rapid development cycle and lower investment costs than'the southbound interface,
which requires specialized hardware.

While there is no standard, many controllers have chosen to implement a REST or’
RESTful northbound interface. This’ ensures. decoupling in space between the
application and the controller.

With this, the controller has control over what functions it exposes to the SDN

_ applications and its performance will not be affected by them, since applications can

ds required for the alignment of the network to th

* The importance of the Northbound Interf

* The Northbound Interfaces Working Group h

run ona different host.

Northbound APIs present an abstraction of network functions with a programmable
interface for applications to consume the network services and configure the network
dynamically. They allow the applications to dictate the behaviour of the network.

There are two kinds of communications that occur in SDN; one is between a forwarding
plane element and a controller and the next is between the controller, the applications _
or business logic. oe | | Lo

Northbound APIs usually provide a list of vendors related base network functions

which are then used to configure user specific infrastructure and the controller
interprets it into a language that each infrastructure node can understand.

The primary reason for the existence of Northbound APIs is because external

management systems ‘Or network applications may wish to extract information and

control the underlying network and parts of its behaviour.

They also expose the universal network abstraction data model and functionality

within the controller for use by network applications.
and have effective orchestration of the network. It

They are used to facilitate innovation
e needs of different applications and

they enable maximum utility of the SDN architecture.
ace is that it simplifies the operation of the

level API between the application layer and the
development of network functionalities.

as the goal of building an interface
abstraction and across a wide range of

Control plane, by providing a high
Controller. This makes it easier for the

“apable of dealing with different levels of
domains, ,

 ®
- TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 61 =====

Software Defined Networks 4-4 SDN Programming

e Northbound APIs can enable basic network functions like path computation, loop

avoidance, routing and security. Network applications that could be optimized through
the northbound interface include load balancers, software defined security services and

orchestration applications across cloud resources.

e The implementation of Northbound APIs uses various approaches :

1. Define portable low-level application interfaces that make the southbound API
look like device drivers.

2. Create Ad-Hoc Northbound API that are specific to a controller. These have their
own purpose and specific definitions. -
Translate application requirements-into lower level service requests.
Propose a general control platform based on Linux and abstractions such as the’
virtual file system.

5. Allow network administrators - to define module specific allocations and access
control policies. .

6. UseSDN programming language

¢ The northbound interface is implemented in software; therefore, it’ can’ have a more

tapid development cycle and lower investment costs than the southbound interface,
which requires specialized hardware.

e¢ REST API: A Representational State Transfer (REST) API or an API that i is RESTful is

Az] Current Languages and Tools.

neither a protocol, language nor an established standard. It is basically constraints that
an API must follow in order to bea RESTful API.

Network devices have always been: considered as configurable black boxes until the.
emergence of Software-Defined Networking (SDN). .

SDN enables the networks to be programmed according to the user requirements;
furthermore, it allows the network to be easily modified to suit transient demands.
However, how do we program the network ? SDN - compliant switches offer a low:
level interface that makes programming error-prone.

The controllers provide application programming interfaces, but still low-level, limited
and inflexible, High - level languages have the Potential to be a better alternative to

' program the network.

There exist several SDN programming languages implementing different sets of
functionalities and focusing on solving various issues.

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS® - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 62 =====

Networks -
sot pefined 4-5 SDN Programming
_gronetle |
, frenetic is a domain - specific language for programming OpenFlow networks,
this domain - specific programming language allows network operators, rather
than manually configuring each con anected network device, to program the

network as a whole.

, It introduces a set of purely functional abstractions that enable modular program

development, defines high - level, programmer centric, packet processing operators
and eliminates many of the difficulties of the two-tier programming model.

Itis embedded in Python and comprises of two levels of abstraction.

Frenetic. is an open - source SDN controller platform designed to make SDN
programming easy, modular and semantically correct, based on programming
languages with the following essential features :

a) High - level abstractions that give programmers direct control over the

network, allowing them to specify what they want the network to do without
worrying about how to implementit.

b) Modular constructs that facilitate compositional reasoning about programs.

c) Portability, allowing programs . ‘written for one platform to be reused with
different devices.

d) Rigorous’ semantic foundations that precisely’ document the wietrng of the
language and provide a solid platform for mechanical program analysis tools.

2. Procera

* Procera is a high level network control language that allows network operators to
express reactive network control policies, without having to resort to general
purpose programming of the network controller. —

* Procera Networks delivers Network Intelligence solutions based on Deep Packet
Inspection technology, |
3, Ryu

* Ryuisa highly modular, small SDN controller written in Python. The core of Ryu
_is smaller than other controllers, instead every feature is implemented as a
Component, a,

Ryu supports’ multiple OpenFlow versions, along with some other related
Protocols. Ryu does not have any form of governance or corporate sponsors.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 63 =====

Software Defined Networks

4-6 SDN Programmin

LLL]

4, OpenDaylight

OpenDaylight is a modular controller written in Java. It supports a large number of
networking protocols, such as OpenFlow, BGP, SNMP, LISP and more.
OpenDaylight has a large amount of backing from different companies.
OpenDaylight uses the Apache Karaf framework as a container for its software
Using the karaf console, features can be easily turned on or off.

Configuration and logging are also handled by karaf. |

Karaf has a number of components available for use, most important a web seryer
used by the northbound interface of OpenDaylight.

5. NetKAT

NetKAT is a network: language for. SDN programming that has a solid
mathematical, semantic foundation. It is similar to NetCore and Pyretic although

neither language cari provide potentially infinite behaviours.

NetKAT applies its complete equational theory and provides syntactic techniques
for the same. Hence, its applications in a network include checking reachability,

isolating traffic between programs through non - interference properties that it

provides, as well as compilation algorithms correctness.

Its design includes a mathematical structure called Kleene algebra with tests (KAT)
that provides a solid semantic foundation for NetKAT.

6. Mininet

Mininet is a network emulator capable of creating virtual networks with hundreds
of hosts and switches on a single computer. It is based on Linux process
virtualization to run the nodes in the OS kernel.

As of Linux version 2.2.26 there is support for network namespaces, a lightweight
Virtualization feature and Mininet takes advantage of it. This means that each
Process can have a separate network interface, routing table and Address
Resolution Protocol table. Then, it is possible to have links between hosts and
switches (processes), in order to build a virtual network.

With a single command, Mininet can create a realistic virtual network on any type
of machine (Virtual Machine (VM), cloud-hosted, or native). Therefore, it provides

an inexpensive solution and streamlined development running in line with

production networks.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 64 =====

ws fined Networks
soaware Dell 4-7 SDN Programming

« Mininet’s logical nodes can be connected into networks. These nodes are
sometimes called containers, or more accurately, network namespaces. Containers
consume sufficiently fewer resources that networks of over a thousand nodes have
created, running on a single laptop, ,

« A Mininet container is a process (or group of processes) that no longer has.access to
all the host system’s native network interfaces. Containers are then assigned virtual
Ethernet interfaces, which are connected to other containers through a virtual
switch. |

e Mininet connects a host and a switch using a virtual Ethernet (veth) link. The veth »
link is analogous to a wire connecting two virtual interfaces.

e Features of Mininet : |

i. Fast prototyping for new networking protocols.
ii. Simplified testing for complex topologies. without the need of buying
expensive hardware.
iii. Realistic execution as it runs ; real code on the Unix and Linux kernels,
iv. Open source environment backed bya large community contributing
extensive documentation.
° Basic commands are as follows: | .
« After logging into the server, start mininet by typing:
> sudo mn -c (enter the password for the computer)
This will clean up the mininet framework and reset it to the initial state. Start mininet
again but without cleaning it up by:
> sudo mn
¢ We should get a mininet prompt as follows : mininet>
To list the topology type :
mininet> net
Display Mininet CLI commands :
mininet> help

Display nodes :
mininet> nodes

N

- Floodlight —
“° Floodlight is a Java-based OpenFlow controller. It was developed by Big Switch
Networks and used in their commercial switches. Then, opened to the community

"under an Apache license, where it is actively developed.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 65 =====

Software Defined Networks 7:8 SDN Programmin ng

e Floodlight is compatible with hardware and virtual switches, such as the Ovs.
latest stable version of Floodlight is vl. 212, it has a defined REST-like Ap] for the

NBI, although it only has one application using this interface.

e Other applications are built in as Java modules, because they need high,
bandwidth in communications with the controller. These modules provide their

resources to the applications through the NBI.

ReV BWrOUeS| HO]

1. What is Mininet ? Explain basic commands of Mininet.

Composition of SDN.

1. Flow Table

¢ Flow tables are the fundamental data structures in an SDN device. These flow
tables allow the’ device to evaluate incoming packets and take the appropriate
action based on the contents of the packet that has just been received.

¢ Flow table resides on the network device and consists ofa series of flow entries and
the actions to perform when a packet matching that flow arrives at the device.
When the SDN device receives a | Packet, it consults its flow tables in search of a
match. |

¢ These flow tables had been constructed previously when the controller
downloaded appropriate flow rules to the device. If the SDN device finds a match,

it takes the appropriate configured action, | which usually entails forwarding the
packet.

¢ If it does not find a . match, the switch can either drop the packet or pass it to the
controller, depending on the version of OpenFlow and the configuration of the
switch. .

¢ Each flow table entry contains :

a) Match fields: To match against packets. These consist of t the ingress port and
packet headers and optionally metadata specified by a previous table.
b) Priority : Matching precedence of the flow entry.
¢) Counters : Updated when packets are matched.
. a) Instructions : To modify the action set or pipeline processing.

e) Timeouts : Maximum amount of time or idle time before flow is expired by the
~ Switch.

(a)
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 66 =====

§

oftware Defined Networks

4-9 SDN Programming.

f) Cookie: Data value chosen by the controller. May be used by the controller to

filter flow Statistics, flow modification and flow deletion. Not used when
processing packets, :

2, SDN Software Switches

Implementation of SDN devices ; in software is the simplest means of creating an

SDN device, because the flow tables, flow entries, and match fields involved are

easily mapped to gener al software data structures, such as sorted arrays and hash
tables.

Implementations in software are likely to be slower and less efficient than those .
implemented in hardware, since. they -do not benefit from any hardware
acceleration, | oy .
Software SDN device implementations are most often found in software-based
network devices, such as the hypervisors of a virtualization system.

3. Hardware SDN Devices

Network devices utilize specialized hardware designed to facilitate the inspection
of incoming packets and | the subsequent decisions that follow based on the packet-
matching operation. .
hardware includes the layer ‘two and layer three forwarding tables, usually -
implemented using Content - Addressable Memories (CAMs) and Temary Content .
- Addressable Memories (TCAMS).

m¥4) Network Functions Virtualization -

Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) is a way to virtualize network services, such
as routers, firewalls and load balancers, that have traditionally been run on proprietary

hardware.
These services are packaged as Virtual Machines (VMs) on commodity hardware,
which allows service providers to run their network on standard servers instead of

proprietary ones.
NFV architecture consists of :

a)

b)

Virtualized Network Functions (VNFs) are software applications that deliver
network functions such as file sharing, directory services and IP configuration.
Network Functions Virtualization infrastructure (NFVi) consists of the

infrastructure components, compute, storage, networking on a platform to support
software, such as a hypervisor like KVM or a container management platform,

needed to run network apps.

® *
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

eererrex x AKAeed everest pew teer~ Sia X oe ceceinhit

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 67 =====

: SDN P ,
Software Defined Networks 4-10 rogramming .

and Network Orchestration (MANO) provides the

c) Management, Automation fon
astructure and provisioning new VNFs,

framework for managing NFV infr

e NEV and SDN are not dependent on each other,
virtualization and use network abstraction, but how they separate functions and

but they do have similarities. Both rely

on

abstract resources is different. —

SDN separates network forwarding functions from network control functions with the

goal of creating a network that is centr ally manageable and programmable.

¢ NEV abstracts network functions from hardware. NFV supports SDN by providing the
infrastructure on which SDN software can run.

¢ NFV and SDN can be used together, depending on what you want to accomplish and
both use commodity hardware. With ‘NFV ‘and SDN, you can create a network
architecture that is more flexible, programmable and uses resources efficiently.

¢ NEV decouples network functions from dedicated hardware devices and moves them
to general-purpose servers, which allows multiple functions to be consolidated onto a
single physical. server with well-defined open interfaces to Management and
Orchestration systems. ; 7 ee . ;

¢ This virtualization of network functions reduces dependency on. dedicated hardware
appliances for network operators and allows for improved - scalability and
customization across the entire network. Different from a-virtualized network, NFV

- seeks to offload network functions only, rather than the entire network.

e Separating network functions from hardware yields numerous benefits for the network
operator, which include : - i

a) Reduced space needed for network hardware |
b) Reduce network power consumption -

c) Reduced network maintenance costs

d) Easier network upgrades |

e) Longer life cycles for network hardware

f)’ Reduced maintenance and hardware costs |

° Fig. 4.4.1 shows a simplified view of the ETSI NEV architecture.

Nee
®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 68 =====

Soft

ware Defined Networks

SO Programming

Infrastructure
“| sefvices

OSS and BSS partners |

Applications
- and
“services

; Ta a] Ih SAI

_NFV Infrastructure (NFVI) ©

OEY
eae : Manageme thor ng :

Doe

Virtualization layer ad
. hia Neus rchestration-
: | vival Re

CDIENOY

| virtual ate
_ network

and.
hai rdware: a
- platforms:

Fig. 4.4.1 : Simplified view of the ETSI NFV architecture

¢ The major components of the architecture include the NFV infrastructure (NFVI),
VNFs, VNF managers and management and orchestration (MANO). Some of the
critical goals of an open NFV architecture include:

a)

b)

c)
d)

e)

Decomposition: of physical network elements into virtualized network functions

(VNFs) to allow operators ‘to choose the best implementations from a range of -
vendors.

Portability of VNFs to different hardware platforms and hypervisors,

Rapid software - based service delivery.

Standard, open interfaces for improved interoperability in multi - vendor NFV

solutions. _ ; ,

Use of low - cost, commercial off - the - shelf (COTS) hardware

‘© Management and Orchestration (MANO) provides the overarching management and

orchestration of the VNFs in the NFV architecture.

* MANO instantiates the network services through the automation, provisioning and

coc

ordination of workflows to the VIM and VNF Managers that instantiate the VNFs

and overlay networking service chains. MANO connects the NFV architecture with the
existing OSS / BSS.

[43] SDN Implementation
1,

Define a use case: SDN is a broad, multi-faceted technology. Whether it fits in your
organization depends on the problem user want to solve.

Assemble a cross - functional team. SDN is a silo - breaking technology.
Implementing it correctly requires a well - rounded team with a broad range of skills |

and a comprehensive approach.

(1)
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up-thrust for knowledae

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 69 =====

Software Defined Netw. orks

q- 12 SDN Programmin

3.

Test in a less critical network area. Implementing SDN doesn’t require UPTOoting

your entire network

Review your test case. After working with SDN fora while, we should have enough:

data to measure your outcomes against your original goals.

Gain maturity before expanding deployment. Even if your SDN test case perform,
beyond expectations, there’s one final step before expanding it across your network.
Slowly increase your project's footprint and gain maturity before fully expanding

deployment.

e There are a number of programming languages for SDN and the majority of them can

be applied in OpenFlow networks. OpenFlow is the first and only standardized
interface between the control and the infrastructure layer that allows forwarding traffic

in SDN.

« As the OpenFlow nétwork can be programmed on the data flow level, it provides

higher - granular control that enables fast adaptation to network applications and user

requirements.

Applications of Software-Defined Networking

1.

Data centers : The SDN architecture is targeted at Infrastructure-based networks and
data centers fall under this category. Data centers. operate large-scale networks,
which places policy enforcement and traffic management at a critical level.
Enterprise networks : Generally, enterprises run large networks while possessing
rigid security and performance. requirements. For networks in an enterprise
environment to function adequately, the SDN model can be adopted to enforce
policies and services that would optimize network performance as well as enhance
network management. .
Optical networks : Extending SDN to handle data traffic as flows enhances the
integration of multiple network technologies.

Bandwidth management : With the help of SDN applications, operators can use
bandwidth management to ensure the end users to receive online video watching
and optimal browsing experiences.

Content availability : SDN applications can also check the availability of the content
in the content servers before routing requests to servers. A content - routing
application will provide intelligence on its availability along with enabling discovery
of content in the content servers,

ood

oe ,

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 70 =====

prmreonnnntes

NAAT NAL ASAAUPRANAASAEAAMEY MAA ANAA AS AOA
an NAP ARAB PASAAMAAND AI 1 y |

Network Functions

Virtualization (NFV)

Syllabus

Definition of NFV, SDN Vs NFY, In-line network functions, Benefits of Network Functions

Virtualization, Challenges for. Network Functions Virtualization, Leading NF V Vendors,
Comparison of NFV and NV.

Contents

5.1 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) : Background and Motivation

5.2 NFV Architecture

5.3 NEV Vs. SDN —

9.4 NFV Use Cases ;

5.5 Challenges for Network Functions Virtualization |
5.6 Leading NFV Vendors

5.7 Comparison of NFV and NV

5.8 Review Questions with Answers

(5- 1)

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 71 =====

5-2 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Software Defined Networks

Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) : Background and Motivation

° Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) is the replacement of network appliance
hardware with virtual machines. The virtual machines use a hypervisor to ryy
networking computer code and processes like load balancing and routing.

e NFV permits the separation of comm
routers and firewalls. This separation means that network operations will offer new
services dynamically and while not putting in new hardware. Deploying network

s with network functions virtualization takes hours rather than months like

| the virtualized services will run on less costly, generic

unication services from dedicated hardware, like

element
with ancient networking. Also,
servers rather than proprietary hardware.
¢ Additional reasons to use network functions virtualization include : .
1. Pay-as-you-go : NEV models will cut back prices as a result of businesses paying
just for what they have. . —
2. Fewer appliances : NFV runs on virtual machines rather than physical machines,

fewer appliances are necessary and operational prices are lower.

3. Scalability : Scaling the ‘spec with virtual machines is quicker and easier and it

doesn't need getting extra hardware.

Working of Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Essentially, network functions virtualization ‘replaces the practicality provided by
individual hardware networking parts. This implies that virtual machines run software
packages that accomplish identical networking functions because of ancient hardware. -
Load equalization, routing and firewall security area unit all performed by software
package rather than hardware. parts. A hypervisor or software-defined networking
controller permits network engineers to program all of the various segments of the virtual
network and even modify the provisioning of the network. IT managers will put together
numerous aspects of the network practicality through one pane of glass, in minutes.

Benefits of Network Functions Virtualization

Several service providers feel that the advantages of network functions virtualization
outweigh the risks, With ancient hardware-based networks, network managers ought to
purchase dedicated hardware devices and manually tack together and connect them to
make a network, This can be long and needs specialized networking experience.

a)
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 72 =====

aa

software Defined Networks 5-3 Network Functions Virtualization (NEV)

NFV permits virtual networks to run on a typical generic server, controlled by a
hypervisor, that is way more cost-effective than getting proprictary hardware devices.
Network configuration and Management is far easier with a virtualized network. Better of

all, network practicality is modified or another on demand as a result of the network - |

running on virtual machines that are a unit simply provisioned and managed.

— [5.3] Risks of Network Functions Virtualization

NFV makes a network 4 lot of responsive and versatile, and simply ascendable. It will
accelerate time to promote and considerably cut back instrumentation prices. However,
there are security risks and network functions virtualization security issues have verified
to be a hurdle for wide adoption among telecommunications suppliers. Here the risks of

implementing network functions virtualization that service suppliers have to be
compelled to consider :

¢ Physical security controls do not seem to be effective : Virtualizing network parts

will increase their vulnerability to new types of attacks compared to physical

instrumentation that is secured ina very knowledge center.

Malware is tough to isolate arid ‘contain : It is easier for malware to travel among

virtual parts that are a unit all running off of 1 virtual machine than between

hardware parts which will be isolated or physically separated.

¢ Network traffic is a smaller amount transparent : Ancient traffic observance tools’
have a tough time recognizing doubtless malicious anomalies _inside network .
traffic that is traveling east-west between virtual machines, therefore NFV needs a
lot of fine - grained security solutions.

. Complex layers need multiple kinds of security : Network functions virtualization
environments area unit inherently. advanced, with multiple layers that are a unit
laborious to secure with blanket security policies,

NFV Architecture

In a traditional network specification, individual proprietary hardware devices like
routers, switches, gateways, firewalls, load balancers and intrusion detection systems all |
do completely different networking tasks. A virtualized network replaces these items of
apparatus with computer code applications that run on virtual machines to perform
networking tasks.

An NFV design consists of three parts :

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 73 =====

Soltwaro Dofinod Notworks 6-4 __Notwork Functions Virtualization (NFY)

© Centralized virtual network infrastructure : Associate NFV infrastructure jg als
0

supported either an ‘nstrumentation management platform or a hypervisor that
storage and network resources.

abstracts the cipher or cypher,
: Software replaces the hardware parts of a

¢ Computer code applications :
conventional specification to deliver the various varieties of network Practicality

(virtualized network functions).
¢ Framework ; A framework (often called MANO - management, automation anq

network orchestration) is required to manage the infrastructure and provision

network practicality.

Fig. 5.2.1 : NFV architecture

e Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) could be a spec idea that uses the
established technologies of IT virtualization. NFV is intended to deliver the
network services required to support AN infrastructure whole freelance from
hardware by decoupling network functions from ‘proprietary purpose-made
hardware appliances, The package that has these network services square measure

| referred to as Virtual Network Functions (VNF) and run on generic hardware.

° A basic understanding of the varied parts of an NEV design helps to know why
this approach has gained the eye of enterprises who are finding a lot of agile and
ee eee hehe , to deploy and manage distributed network infrastructure and

most parts of AN NFV design embrace the Virtualized Network
TTT

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 74 =====

ware Defined Networks -
soft 6-5 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Functions (VNFs), NFV_ Infrastructur
f é re (NFVI) «
Orchestration (MANO). ( ) and NFV Management and

Network Functions Virtualization Infrastructure

In order to alter the physical and virtual network layers, the NVFI uses low-cost,
standardised x86 computer hardware and software, including hypervisors, virtual
machines and virtual infrastructure managers. It provides the physical resources -
computing, storage, networking and computer code - on which virtual network functions:
are set up and controlled. To enable logically dividing and provisioning hardware
resources to support VNFs, the NFVI offers the virtualization layer that resides above the
hardware. The NFVI is also crucial for building global networks that do not have the
regional restrictions associated with older network topologies. _

Virtual Network Functions

On top of the physical networking infrastructure, virtualized network functions are
run in one or more virtual machines. Routers, switches, SD-WAN, firewalls and a
growing number of other network services are included in VNFs and are now sold as
software by companies like Cisco, Juniper Networks and Town Networks.

Because network operations are virtualized, there is no longer a need for on-the-spot
technical expertise when VNFs are remotely deplcyed. This eliminates preparatory delays |
caused by outdated network gear. In hybrid and multi cloud systems, VNFs provide the
flexibility needed to predict or respond. to changing network performance or growth
needs. -_

| NFV Management and Network Orchestration(MANO)

A social unit of the European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) may
have created the NFV management and network orchestration (MANO) framework. NFV
MANO controls resourcés, including the NFVI as well as VNFs, running in a highly
virtualized data centre as well as calculations, networking, storage and virtual machines,
from original conception to day-to-day operations (VM). To help architects choose the
best NEVI resources to deploy, NFV MANO utilises templates for standard VNFs.

NFV MANO is comprised of three useful areas : |
¢ NFV adapter handles VNF ‘on boarding, lifecycle management, world resource
management and validation and authorization of NFVI resource requests.

5 ;
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 75 =====

Oo

© Virtual Infrastructure Manager controls and manages the NFVI calculation, storag
@

and network resources. .

r controls VNE lifecycle management of instances, Providing ,

e VNF manage
ation role for NFVI and Element/Network Managemen,

coordination and adapt
Systems configuration and event reportage.

NEV MANO functionality is provided by well-known network vendors like Cisco ang
Juniper, as well as open-source offerings from Cloudify and Open Source MANO.
Equinix Enables NFV Architectures
e As the leading global provider of connectivity and colocation facilities, Equinix

recognises the potential of NFV designs to transform how global networks are created,

enforced and maintained. Equinix has made significant efforts to help businesses all
around the world realise the benefits of network function virtualization. Equinix’s
platform offers NFVI resources. A wide range of VNFs are prepared under the
management and orchestration of Equinix Network Edge. Equinix Cloud Exchange

FabricTM (ECX FabricTM) offers global property, enabling businesses to connect with

thousands of cloud, network and SaaS providers globally and deploy VNFs as-a-service

wherever they are needed. |

(y} PLATFORM EQUINIX’
Los Angeles Silicon Valley

Ve 4,
‘oiatseiadiplislds
aws

aad ,

My
Cytly
Y «Gs,

Yee
Ui yMtes
“Mhlaygt

” Network +
edge

Fig. 5.2.2 : Equinix NFV architecture

¢ A real-world use case demonstrates how only a global company will deploy virtual
network services by utilising Equinix's Network Edge. In this instance, production
workloads are hosted in AWS North American country West by a global agricult®
company. Services are provided to any or all of its worldwide locations by these
workloads. development and pre-production inspection Oracle Cloud, which is based
in Phoenix, hosts Oracle systems. Phoenix developers frequently used prior knowledgé
because of the unpredictable performance ‘of knowledge replication from AWS 1

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS ~ - an up-thrust for knowledge .

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 76 =====

Defined Networks
Software 5-7 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Oracle. As a result, package deployments were frequently postponed, which had a
detrimental effect on the business.

By quickly deploying a Cisco virtual router using Network Draw Close Equinix's
regional knowledge centre, the performance issue was fixed. The router establishes |
. connections to production workloads located in the AWS North American West region.
Wherever they connected to the Oracle Cloud on the on ramp, personal virtual
connections connect geographic area with to provide access to workloads running in
Phoenix. The manufacturer's secure, private connection between their AWS and Oracle

workloads solved the synchronisation performance issues without adding any more
physical infrastructure.

Equinix Eliminates the Complexness of Building NFV Architectures

« Enterprises may overcome the limitations of legacy network infrastructures thanks to
NEV designs. Through virtualization, network services may be prepared quickly and
as-needed without being dependent on the underlying hardware. The supply of the
underlying physical and virtual infrastructure resources is swiftly handled by: the
management and orchestration layers. _ -

e Equinix has simplified the NFVI construction and multi-vendor VNF onboarding
processes. This-assures the functionality of those network services and gives clients the
option to select from a wide range of top suppliers including Cisco, Juniper Networks,
and Palo Alto Networks. .With its global software-defined interconnection, ECX
FabricTM, Equinix's approach to NFV designs accommodates both the continuous need
for physical installations and the need for cloud and network connectivity.

¢ By comprehending the essential elements of NFV designs and therefore the global
resources that Equinix offers, businesses will take the first steps toward more potency

“in designing, implementing and controlling their global network resources. .

NFV Vs. SDN

1. While NFV separates specialised hardware components from networking services |

2. Software-defined networking, or SDN, separates network forwarding tasks from
network management activities including routing, policy creation and applications.

3. SDN enables the programming of whole networks through a single pane of glass
because a virtual network control plane determines where to transmit traffic.

4, SDN enables the automation of network control procedures, enabling the network

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 77 =====

ie

Software Defined Networks 5-8 Network Functions Virtualization (NFY)

to swiftly adapt to changing workloads.

A virtual network does not require SDN in order to function, but it may be built on

5.
top of either a physical network or a virtual network.
6. Virtualization technology is essential to the operation of both SDN and NFY,
NFV Use Cases

Here are five examples of network function virtualization use cases that exhibit hoyy .

NFV is being used to tackle a range of challenges as well as offer better solutions to these
and other networking hurdles in order to enhance services and diminish outgoings.

Use case 1- Network virtualization

The main utilization with that NFV technologies square measure being employed

by chiefly telecommunication corporations round the world is, of course, for

network virtualization.

This method creates a virtual network on prime of the physical network and

"permits service suppliers.to expand and accelerate development and innovation of

services, also as different network needs like provisioning, .

In order to optimize their network services, customers look to network
virtualization to decouple their network functions like DNS, caching, IDS and
firewalling from the proprietary hardware that was, till recently, the dominant
solutions, thus on alter them to run on package instead. .

This gives service suppliers the lightsomeness and suppleness they have once
rolling out new network services and may facilitate to scale back their

disbursement on space-stealing physical hardware and also the prices related to.

running, maintaining and infrequently repairing it.

‘However, whereas network virtualization is one amongst the foremost widespread

applications of network functions virtualization, it is by no suggests that the sole
one.

Use case 2- Mobile edge computing

Mobile edge computing is another technological innovation that has gone from
strength to strength over the past number of years and appears solely to be gaining
momentum as we feature on into 2018. Whereas several could raise however
network operate virtualization and mobile edge computing relate to at least oné

another, so as such joined and are actively influencing one another in each area of

development and also the enlargement of applications.

TECHNICAL PUBLICA Tions® ~ 4n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

~~

===== Page 78 =====

software Defined Networks 7

Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Using network operate virtualization permits edge devices to perform machine.
services and supply network functions by generating and utilizing either one or
multiple Virtual Machines (VM).

Network operated virtualization, aboard different technological and network
advances. and developments like software-defined networking and computer
science, can possibly become the prime solutions for the network challenges of
tomorrow thanks to their early integration and combination with one another.

Use case 3 - Video analytics

Another tool that has seen a large increase in its potential since the beginning of the
net of things is video analytics systems and packages. |

Now, corporations square measure able to capture large amounts of knowledge
exploitation of IoT and sensible devices in their factories, stores, offices and even
farms. .

One of the largest problems facing trendy networking is end-to-end network
latency, that poses a true challenge to applications and network services that
square measure very sensitive to network delays, like video analytics.

In order to combat this challenge, enterprises are turning to NFV and SDN
architectures so as to scale back network resource utilization and improve latency.
This could, once combined with exploitation video analytics at the network edge,
scale back information measure use by up to ninetieth in keeping with some
proposals. : ;

With IoT, smart and edge devices sanctioning a lot of and a lot of knowledge to be
generated, collected and so analysed, video analytics systems and packages became
and can still be a progressively necessary part of utilizing the massive knowledge
currently on the market. Network functions virtualization is the design of that to
make these systems upon.

Use case 4 - Orchestration engines

One of the most advantageous NEV use cases is that of orchestration engines. With
conventional legacy networks, issues such as low agility, human error and lack of
automatic processes and alerts made these kinds of networks extremely inadequate

in their capabilities.

¢ One of the principal causes of network downtime is human error, hence why

automated systems are in such high demand.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 79 =====

Software Defined Networks 5-10 Network Functions Virtualization (NE

e They also have the benefit of reducing the costs associated with Paying fo,

maintenance and upkeep as they require markedly less human intervention,

¢ Centralized orchestration engines can prove to be an extremely Worthwhile
investment for those willing to get ‘started, however, when considering 3
centralized automation engine, the following features are widely regarded as
critical :
* — Centralized policy automation
= Centralized hybrid WAN management
« Network wide visibility and segmentation |
" Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) certificate management
* Plug and play from day 0. oe

Use case 5 - Security

e The tools we use.to safeguard our physical and virtual tools have developed as a
result of the numerous technical advances that have taken place over the past ten
years, much like the tools we use to grow our crops or build our automobiles,

¢ However, in fact, firewalls are merely one of almost every security device or
component that will ultimately be virtualized utilising network functions
Virtualization as well as software-defined networking. Virtual firewalls are now
available from several security providers to secure VMs.

¢ The concept of centralized control mechanisms and evenly dispersed enforcement
is one of the key benefits of adopting virtualized security; for these two reasons

alone, businesses wishing to strengthen their security have flocked to research
these sorts of security solutions.

¢ The world may not have been fully conquered by network function virtualization
just yet, but as the world becomes more virtual and NFV (as well as SDN) gain

traction, we may soon witness a day when virtual security, as well as the other use

cases featured on this list, become the norm rather than the exception.

Challenges for Network Functions Virtualization

¢ The main barriers preventing service providers from using SDN and NFV wel

listed in recent market surveys, The findings indicated that the absence
orchestration, active business cases

SDN/NEV were the main deploymen
respondents identified organisation
party VNFs‘and the need for uni

and: competences required to operational”
t difficulties for SDN and NEV. Additional’
al issues, difficulties integrating with thir
form industry standards as major challeng

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS” ~ 4n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 80 =====

software Defined Networks " 5-11 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Fortunately, the majority of these barriers to progress are transitory problems that
service providers can address,

4, Orchestration and Integration in Hybrid Networks

¢ Although industry-standard hardware and software are touted as the foundation
for NFV, service providers can nevertheless experience vendor lock-in. Software
components must be completely interoperable in order for it to function. The
resultant network ought to provide quick scalability, flexibility and resource
_allocation advantages. In order to avoid SDN. and NFV implementation difficulties
and to make it possible for end-to-end services to operate multi vendor networks
made up of both physical and virtual components, hybrid, vendor-agnostic
orchestration is essential. |
e In order to create market-ready, VNF-based service packages that prevent VNF
vendor lock-in and allow setvice providers to immediately launch new services,
the market also needs more thorough preparation among partners. Full access to
interchangeable Virtual Network Functions (VNFs) that may be used effectively
and affordably s should be made > possible via NFV.

2. Business cases" a 7 at ee on mo, a
¢ The idea that software applications running on common platforms would be able
to achieve throughput and latency requirements without using a considerable
amount of CPU resources is unrealistic. Operators are aware that the cost
reductions brought about by NEV are outweighed by the requirement to install full
“racks of computing resources to address an issue that could previously be handled
by a single device. The expenses of the CPU and servers, rack’ space and electricity
needed to match the performance footprint of a dedicated solution wind up being
on par with or even more expensive than alternatives that were specifically

intended for the task. Operational simplicity and much lower total cost of

ownership are still only concepts.

3. Lack of capabilities

¢ It is not surprising that NFV offers a chance to lower OPEX and improve the
customer experience. The availability of vendor solutions and the slower. adoption
of technologies allowing service providers to acquire the skills required to
operationalize SDN/NFV are two challenges. Service provider's networks
transition from hardware- centric, semi-static connectivity platforms to software-
driven, dynamic service platforms as a result of the adoption of SDN and NFV. It is

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 81 =====

- Network Functions Virtualizati
Software Defined Networks 5-12 : won (NFY)

, : rrier until servi
a transformational event and will continue to be a barrie! ICe Providers

start to change.

4. Organizational issues
° The main barriers we
the absence of a governance structure that encourages Co
network and IT as a problem. The organisational tasks of the network and IT
departments should synchronise or integrate as the industry transitions to a more °
software-oriented strategy. The blending of network and IT tasks goes against how

most service providers are set up, yet it is now widely accepted.

rent regulatory concerns. However, respondents did identity
mmunication between the

§. Lack of standards a , ee

e Standards were referred to as a small impediment, although they are frequently
mentioned as widespread impediments to innovation. In many _ instances,
standards help innovation catch up. While standards organizations are trying to
make their procedures more efficient, they frequently find it difficult to keep up
with the fast-paced competition in the sector. Service providers and their strategic
partners are under pressure from this dynamic to invest in and create multi
vendor, end-to-end solutions that can automatically adapt to standards over time.

6. Management and orchestration issues a _ | . a
e¢ SDN/NFV delivers dynamism .and scalability, -which makes administration and
~ orchestration in multi tenant environments challenging.. The network should
handle circumstances when resource needs fluctuate significantly in comparatively
short durations in order to flexibly distribute resources on-the-fly. To meet this

demand, a flexible, automated and . programmable orchestration platform is
necessary. — . ;

7. Security and privacy

¢ New potential attacks on software networks are made possible by the open
interfaces that facilitate the network's programmability. This necessitates the

_ development of a standardized, multi-level security architecture that includes
guidelines and controls for software integrity

detection and mitigation, user authentic
SDN/NFV-related security and privacy issue

remote attestation, dynamic threat.
ation and accounting management.
Ss are now a problem.

TECHNICAL PUBLIGATIOgg® a ——_#_———

CHNICA ®
L PUBLICATIONS~ . an up-thrust for knowledae

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 82 =====

Software Defined Networks 5-19

pial Leading NFV Vendors

Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Here are the top ten companies operating in network function virtualization market --
Juniper Networks, Inc.

e To help clients create scalable, dependable, secure and affordable networks for
their organisations, Juniper Networks designs, develops and distributes high-
performance network solutions and services. The firm is divided into two divisions
: Product and services. Virtual private networks, service control’ gateways,
orchestration and automation and virtualized network functions are just a few of
the network function virtualization options provided by Juniper Networks.

¢ The corporation is present in a number of areas, including the Americas, Asia-
Pacific, the Middle East and Africa, thanks to its subsidiaries and a robust

distribution network. Mist System, Inc., AppFormix, Inc. and Aurrion, Inc. are a
few of its subsidiaries WU. S.).

Ericsson

e One of the top suppliers of ICT to service providers j is Ericsson. The business offers
network assistance and is a pioneer in 4G and 5G mobile technology. It does
business through the network, digital services, managed services, and other
business segments. The company's portfolio includes telecom services, internet and
multimedia solutions. for operators, businesses and the media sector, as well as
mobile and fixed network infrastructure.

¢ The corporation has operations throughout the Americas, Asia-Pacific, the Middle
East, and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Among
its subsidiaries are Cenx, Inc., Ericsson-LG (South Korea), and Ericsson-Nikola.
Tesla (Croatia) (U.S.).

Cisco Systems, Inc.

¢ The Internet is powered by a wide variety of technologies that Cisco Systems
creates and sells. Its intent-based solutions are continually learning and adapting
across networking, security, collaboration, apps and the cloud to give customers a
highly secure, intelligent platform for their digital company. The business is
divided into four divisions ; Infrastructure platform, services, application, security,
and others. Advanced technologies are provided by the corporation, including IP
technology, security, home networking, optical networking, storage area
networking and wireless portals.

eee

(
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 83 =====

Software Defined Networks 5-14 Network Functions Virtualization (NEV)

rations throughout the Middle East and Africa, Eur
s to its subsidiaries and robust distribution etwo,
adSoft, Inc., OpenDNS, and Cisco Webbs, Ine

e The corporation has oper
Asia and North America thank
Some of its subsidiaries include Bro

(U.S.).

Hewlett Packard Enterprise
¢ A global leader in information technology, HewlettPackard offers consumers, , small

and medium-sized businesses, major corporations and the health and education
sectors a comprehensive range of hardware and related services. The firm Provides
a range of network function virtualization services, including vulnerability
research, data- driven security enhancement and ongoing security maintenance,

e The firm is present throughout } North America, Europe, Asia- Pacific, Latin America
and the Middle East and Africa thanks to, its subsidiaries and robust distribution
’ network.
"@ The Hewlett Packard.Enterprise has a number of subsidiaries, including VoodooPC
(Canada), Apogee Corporation Limited (UK), and Indigo America, Inc. (U.S.).

‘Fujitsu, Ltd.

e The top ICT firm j in the world, Fujitsu provides a. L wide selection of technological
goods, services and solutions.. Technology. Solutions, Ubiquitous Solutions, and
Device Solutions make up the. company's. three business segments. The firm
provides a range of network function virtualization solutions, including those for
networks, storage, computation and virtual evolving packet cores.

¢ The corporation has operations throughout the Middle East and Africa, Europe,
Asia and North America thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network.

Fujitsu FSaS, Inc., Nifty Corporation, PFU Limited and FDK Corporation are a few
of its subsidiaries.

Affirmed Networks

any with its headquarters in
advance intelligence in mobile data networks
The business creates a mobile network platform that offers network slicing, virtual
probe and analytics and IoT virtualization solutions. The company's mobile co
capabilities include cloud-native mobile core solutions, virtualized DPI and Gil

services, optimised IoT access, Wi-Fi and service automation. The corporation he

Operations in North America, Europe and Asia-Pacific thanks to its subsidiar™
and robust distribution network,

¢ Affirmed Networks, a 2010- founded comp.
, Massachusetts, strives to change and

TEC, ®
HNICAL PUBLICATIONS” - an up-thrust for knowledge.

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 84 =====

efined Networks
software D 5-15 Network Functions Virtualization (NFV)

Mavenit Systems, Inc.

ie Mavenir Systems, established in 2005 and with its headquarters in Richardson,
Texas, 18 a pioneer in the implementation of virtualized solutions for mobile
network operators all over the world. For communications service providers, the
firm focuses on speeding and redefining the change of mobile network economics.
The firm offers a range of network function virtualization technologies, including
virtualized radio access network, evolved packet core and packet compute.
e The corporation is present throughout North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, Latin
America, the Middle East and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust

distribution network. Its subsidiaries include Aquto Corporation, Ranzure
Networks, Inc. and Netonomy, Ltd. (U.S.). .

’ Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.

e Leading ICT solution supplier Huawei. Carrier Business, Enterprise Business,
Consumer Business and Others make up the company's four business segments. It
provides services for network function virtualization, including EC IoT solutions
and services for intelligent computing. oO

¢ The corporation is present across North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, the Middle
East, and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Huawei
Device Co., Ltd., Huawei Machine Co., Ltd., and Shanghai Huawei Technologies
Co., Ltd. are a few of its subsidiaries. — °

Ribbon Communications, Inc. .
© ‘Real-time communications industry pioneer Ribbon provides cutting-edge
software solutions. The firm is divided into two divisions : Product and services.
The business provides next-generation communication technologies, such as
internet protocol, session initiation protocol, software-defined WAN (SD-WAN) for
‘unified communications and communication platform as a service. Ribbon
provides a range of network function virtualization services. and solutions,
including next-generation intelligent edges, virtual mobile cores, virtual internet

' protocols and mobile network evolution. |
¢ The corporation has operations throughout North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific,
the Caribbean and Latin America and the Middle East and Africa thanks to its
subsidiaries and robust distribution network. Genband LLC, I Taqua Inc, Network
Equipment Technologies Inc and Performance Technologies Inc. are a few of its

subsidiaries (U.S.).

®
TECHNICAL PUBIICATIONS  - anun-thrust for knowlacine

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 85 =====

Software Defined Networks 5-16 Network Functions Virtualization (NFY)

Ciena Corporation

e Ciena is an international provider, of hardware, software and services for
‘  telecommunications networking. With targeted innovation, Ciena unites the
flexibility and economics of Ethernet with the dependability and capacity of optical
networking, all while delivering the top network automation in the sector. The
business is divided into four divisions : Global services, platform software ang
‘ services, automation software and services and networking platform. The business
also provides network function virtualization solutions such a. virtual Wi-Fj

"gateway, virtual evolved packet core and virtual radio access network.

¢ The corporation is present throughout North America, the Caribbean and Latin
America, Asia-Pacific, Europe, the Middle East and Africa thanks to its subsidiaries
and a robust distribution -network. Its subsidiaries include Packet ° Design and
Centina Systems (U.S.) .

Comparison of NFV and NV

‘Tt outlines the key components of the complete - ;
network, including its infrastructure, services
and available applications. It provides network
policies that control how network resources are
allocated and used. The hypervisor coordinates
and regulates lower-level network operations.

It is architecture is centered on data centers..

> By centralizing network control and

_ programmability, NFV separates the control
“ plane and the data forwarding plane.

By centralizing network control and
programmability, SDN isolates the control
plane from the data forwarding plane.

| "- TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® . =. . |

~ @n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 86 =====

“8, ¢ Supported by manufacturers of gear and
+ software for business networking,

vn : Corporate IT serves as the SDN Business
_.>, Initiator.
Industry-standard servers or switches are used
to execute SDN applications.

SDN reduces network expenses further by.
doing away with the requirement for pricey
switches and routers,

Review Questions with Answers

Define NFV. (Refer section 5.1) . / i
How Network Functions Virtualization (NEV) works (Refer. section 5.1.1)
What are benefits of network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.1.2) Werks ©
What are the’ risks of network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.1.3)
Explain NEV architecture. (Refer section 5.2)
What are the challenges for network functions virtualization (Refer section 5.2)
Comparison of NFV and NV (Refer section 5.7) | [Rts6]

ND OR WN pS

en ,
®
| TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS — - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 87 =====

| Unie V aay)

Unit Vi |

CPPRE IPRA RPEERSERDEODDAREY SD DADESBLNT PATO DANE:

SDN Use Cases

Syllabus

Juniper SDN: Framework -- IETF SDN Framework - Open Daylight Controller - Floodlight
Controller - Bandwidth Calendaring - Data Center Orchestration.

Contents

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
66
6.7

Juniper SDN Framework

IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) SDN Framework
Open Daylight (ODL) Controller. .

Floodlight Controller
Bandwidth Calendaring (BWC)
Data Center Orchestration

Review Questions with Answers

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 88 =====

7 SDN Us
Software Defined Networks 6-2 © Cases

Juniper SDN Framework
e When it comes to Juniper Networks,
"controller technology, the offering entails a controller that resembles a virtualized route
reflector and supports an OpenStack API mapping to its own internal service creation
APIs.
¢ The Juniper method uses a high-level data model that self-generates and offers a REST
API to SDN applications like the one in Fig. 6.1.1 (originally intended to be IF-Map
based). A data centre orchestration application is shown in the Fig. 6.1.1 that may be
used to set up virtual routers on hosts in order to connect the overlay instances across
the network underlay. The API is used to coordinate the entire system anda portion of
it overlaps the OpenStack Quantum API. — | | | .

which purchased Contrail System’s SDN

REST—«

[lee en eed ede es SS See ry

SDN system .

IF-MAP

me ane me nnn me tn ek ae we an ee ewe ee ee ne ee ee ee ee ee oe oe

XMPP BGP, DMI, XMPP

Fig. 6.1.1: High-level operation of Juniper networks virtual network system SDN controller
‘system
¢ The controller is a multi-node system with several different

subsystems. The goal of
this strategy is to promote high availability,

scalability and extensibility. The SY: stem
can manage scale out server modules for analytics, configuration and control by

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS™. &n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

att

===== Page 89 =====

Sag ene J ‘Or.
Sofware D aned Networks 6-3 _SDN Uso Caso3

i isa the T i 4 1 e
supporting theoretically separable modules that can run as separate virtual machines.
A quick simplification would be :

Analytics | 4
« Supports the query interface and also storage interface for statistics/counter reporting

Configuration

« Facilitates the compiler that uses the high-level data model to exchange API requests
for network actions into low-level data model for implementation via the control code.

Control ;

» The BGP speaker for horizontal scale distribution between controllers (or
administrative domains) and the implementer of the low-level data model (L9VPN
network primitives distributed via XMPP commands- VRFs, routes, policies/filters).
This server also collects statistics and other management information from the agents it
manages via the XMPP channel.

« BGP, a defined protocol enabling horizontal scalability and the possibility for multi
vendor interoperability, is used by the control node to distribute network state. In the
near term, nevertheless, compatibility with already-existing BGP networks makes it
more valuable. The design incorporates lessons learned from more contemporary,
open-source architecture projects that deal with massive, volatile data storage and
communication across modular component parts. The contrail solution makes. use of

tested internal system open source solutions. |

IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) SDN Framework —

_¢ The IETF is looking into SDN models for workable technological solutions. An
SDNRG (IRTF SDN Research Group) session at IETF 86 in Orlando, Florida,
included multiple presentations on various potential solutions. The seminar
discussed Network Function Virtualization (NFV), which entails utilising the
virtualization technology of network equipment, as well as a wide range of other
relevant issues, including the examination of OpenFlow.

oA brief introduction to the forwarding and control element separation (For CES)
protocol, which is theoretically comparable to OpenFlow, was also given. It is
intended that this thorough analysis would enable SDNRG to offer suggestions on
the architecture of the protocol, network and service and that it will speed up in-

depth debate.

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS -an up-thrust for knowledge:

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 90 =====

SDN U
-4 Sec
Software Defined Networks 6 886g

¢ While the SDNRG was conducting its investigation, the following IETF Working

i -related initiatives :
groups began their own SDN ity is envisioned with SDN. However, ther
ween IP routers and the SDN controle, ;
System3(I2R5) WG conducted its firs in-
o address issues including the dynamic

e Intelligent network progranunabil
haven't been any standard interfaces bet
to this point. The Interface to Routing
person meeting at JETF 86 in order t
modification of state routing data. |

* The logically centralized management paradigm of SDN necessitates further
improvements to the already implemented technologies. Path computation
element4 (PCE), for instance, is a common technique in IP/MPLS that can locate the
best label switched pathways (LSPs). However, a new addition, stateful-PCE, js
being suggested to address the issue because the previous PCE definition was
insufficient (the LSP state could not be monitored or altered by the controller side),

¢ Fora computational and network infrastructure to operate without interruption,
the separation of the control and data planes is beneficial. Data Center Virtual
Private Networks-VPNs spanning a number of virtual machines-are a topic of
discussion for the Network Virtualization OverlaysS (NVO3) Working Group
(VMs). NVO3 is proposing an architecture in which control-planes (such as BGP,
XMPP) are separated from data-planes’ in collaboration with the. L2VPN and

' L3VPN WGs (e.g., MPLS, NVGRE, VXLAN): This design is anticipated to provide
the multi tenant datacenter network's high level of scalability. There are a few

thousand to several million virtual machines running on more than 100,000 real
servers, according the WG's charter. oO

SDN offers a centralized view of the topology of the network. Application-layer

traffic optimization (ALTO) can be implemented at the controller side in this
context oo |

¢ The IETF is not focussed on a unified SDN architecture . Instead, the IETF works on
specific, tightly focussed problems with an emphasis on protocol specification.
Work is organised into “Working Groups” - Each has a charter and milestones °

. Produces Internet-Drafts to become RFCs - Works on its own mailing list.
e The IETF is the foremost standards body for the Internet. | .
e If one works in the Internet, then one needs IE

TF standards (RFCs) - Building
networks - Implementing softw

are or hardware. If one wants to influence what ®
in the standards, one needs to participate |

TECHNICAL PUBLICA TI ons® | |

~ aN up-thrust for knowledge’

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 91 =====

Software Defined Networks ~ 6-5 SDN Use Cases
IN VO NS
Open Daylight (ODL) Controller

« Since the OpenDaylight controller is JVM software, it may be used with any hardware
and operating system that supports Java. The following tools are utilized by the
controller, an application of the Software Defined Network (SDN) concept :

1, Maven : OpenDaylight employs Maven for easy build automation. Mavén makes
use of pom.xml (Project Object Model) to script the dependencies among bundles
and describe what bundles to load and start.

2. OSGi: This framework is the back-end of OpenDaylight as it permits dynamically
loading bundles and packages JAR files and binding bundles jointly for exchanging
information. : oo

3. JAVA interfaces : Java interfaces are used for event listening, specifications and
forming patterns. This is the main way in which specific bundles implement call-
back functions for events and also to indicate awareness of specific state.

4, REST APIs : These are northbound APIs such as topology manager, host tracker,
flow programmer, static routing and so on. a

¢« Applications ‘use the open northbound APIs that the controller exposes. The
northbound APIs enable both bidirectional REST and the OSGi framework.
._ Applications that run in the same address space as the controller utilise the OSGi
framework, but those that do not (or even do not run on the ‘same system as) the
controller use the REST (web-based) API. The apps include the business: logic and
algorithms. The controller is used by these applications to acquire network information,
analyse data using its algorithm and then coordinate the implementation of new rules
across the network. Multiple protocols, including OpenFlow 1.0, OpenFlow 1.3, BGP-

LS and others, are supported as plugins on the southbound. At first, the OpenDaylight

controller used an OpenFlow 1.0. southbound plugin. Other OpenDaylight contributors

start adding up to the controller code. These modules are linked dynamically into a

Service Abstraction Layer (SAL). . | .

* The SAL exposes the services that the modules developed north of it are designed to
use, Regardless of the underlying protocol used between the controller and the
network devices, the SAL determines how to provide the desired service. As OpenFlow
and other protocols develop over time, this safeguards the application’s investment.

The controller must be aware of the devices in its domain, including their capabilities,

teachability and other factors, in order to control them. The Topology Manager

Maintains and manages this data. The creation of the topology database for the

Topology Manager is assisted by other components including ARP handler, Host

saad
THALIMIC AL OPI IA TIOANIC an tin. the

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 92 =====

| 7 SDN YU
6-6 Se
Software Defined Networks Cases

Tracker ‘Device Manager :and Switch Manager. An open nga conn effort Calleg
’ 1

OpenDaylight Project (ODL) aims to improve SDN by provi & 4 community-leq and

industry-supported.

* Users can customise an SDN controller using the OpenDaylight Platform’,

| multiprotocol and modular features to’ meet their unique requirements. Ir

administrators have the choice of using a single protocol or a combination of Protocols

to handle complicated issues as they arise thanks to this modular and multiprotocg]
strategy. All SDN systems, including’ OpenFlow, Open VSwitch (OVS) Database
(OVSDB), NETCONE, and BGP, are supported by the platform.
¢ The open communications protocol that enables the SDN Controller to interact with the
forwarding plane and modify the network is defined by the OpenFlow protocol, which
is regarded as the first SDN standard. Businesses can better adapt to their changing
demands and have m more control 0 over r their networks thanks to this.

fees OpenDaylight. (ODL) Architecture

e OpenDaylight i isa modular open platform for customizing and automating networks of
any size and scale. The OpenDaylight Project arose out of the SDN movement, with a
clear focus on network. programmability. It-was designed from the outset as a
foundation for commercial ‘solutions that address a variety of use. cases in existing
network environments. ~ -

ODL architecture has three layers :
1. Southbound plugins : Used to communicate. with the network devices.

2. Core Services: Which can be used by Service Abstraction Layer (SAL) which is
based on OSGi to help components going i in and out of the controller while le the
controller is running: .

3. Northbound interfaces : Which allows operators to relate high- ‘level policies to.
network devices or integration of ODL with other platforms.

1.: Modularity and extensibility _

¢ ODL's built-in techniques make it easier to join code modules, The controller uses

OSGi containers to load bundles dynamically, giving it a very flexible way to add
functionality.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS® |

- an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 93 =====

‘ Software Defined Networks

SDN Use Cases

asvajay uaBAxg 1yhyAequedg

LHOMAVG
NadO

31!

6

Fig

ODL Architecture

TE

CHMIC AL PUBLICA rions® -antnn-thrust far knevwdodean

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 94 =====

2. Scalability )

¢ ODL employs a model-based methodology,
logic computations, a global, in-memory pictur
additional features enabling multi-site deployments
speed and fault tolerance, ODL's most recent version signifi
platform's scalability and resilience.

¢ Cluster scalability : AKKA, a distributed datastore, distributes the current SDN
state and enables controllers to failover in the case of a cluster split, while ODL has

which implies that in order to execute
e of the network is necessary. With
for global reach, application.
cantly improves the

internal capability for cluster maintenance.
e However, when a cluster expands, communication and coordination tasks rise
‘quickly, limiting performance improvements for each additional cluster member.
e Scalability of architecture : To manage traffic flows across the SDN islands, ODL
__ has native BGP routing capabilities.
e OpenDaylight’s integration with _OpenStack enabled multi-site networking and

improved networking performance.

3. Interfaces ,

e Southbound : A wide range. of Southbound interfaces are » supported, including
OpenFlow, P4, NETCONF, SNMP, BGP, RESTCONF and PCEP.

e Northbound. : ODL provides the broadest selection of gRPC and RESTful
northbound interfaces. The OSGi for applications running in the same address
space as the controller and the common RESTful interface are among the

‘ northbound interfaces offered by ODL. To make integration and development
tasks easier, Northbound interfaces are graphically represented using DLUX.

4. Telemetry
e ODL includes just a small amount of telemetry zelated capabilities at the project
level. .
-e Although there are steps toward offering northbound telemetry feeds with the -
most recent development release, they are still in the early stages of design and are
not expected to be ready for production in the near future.

- 5. Resilience and fault tolerance —
¢ Similar to ONOS, the ODL fault tolerance method requires an-odd number of SDN
controllers to offer fault tolerance in the system. In the case of a master node
failure, the network would pick a new leader to assume control. These controllers

®
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS  - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 95 =====

Software Defined Networks 6-9 ; SDN Use Cases

employ somewhat different methods for selecting a leader; whereas’ ONOS
prioritises eventually consistent behavior, ODL prioritizes high availability.

6. Programming language’ .
* From a language viewpoint, ODL has been written in Java.

7. Community

¢ The second SDN controller in the Linux Foundation Networking family is called
ODL. Of all the open source SDN controllers on the market, this project has the
broadest community Support and numerous well-known firms are actively
engaged in its development.

GA] Floodlight Controller

e Anew open and programmable network j is presented by Software Defined Networking —
(SDN), which combines connection-oriented technologies with routing overlay
technology. Bringing control planes into a logically centralized SDN controller, which

_ may then function as a network operating system and decoupling control and data ©
planes from network devices.

¢ This is Floodlight controller, an OpenFlow controller. While applications built 0 on top of
the Floodlight controller implement various capabilities to address various user
demands across the network, the Floodlight controller implements a set of common
functionalities to control and query an OpenFlow network. Floodlight is made up of
application modules that implement solutions for various problems and controller
modules that implement the essential network functions that a software defined

network would expose to apps.

BZ\7]] Salient Features of Floodlight Controller’, ‘
¢ Developers may benefit from the Floodlight controller since it is designed i in Java
and enables them to quickly adjust software and construct apps.
¢ REST APIs are included, which make it simpler to programmatically interact with
the product. Additionally, the Floodlight website provides coding samples to help .

developers create the product.
* The Floodlight controller has been tested with physical and virtual OpenFlow-
compatible switches and it can coexist with the resources presently available to

organizations.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 96 =====

0 SDN Use Cases

Software Defined Networks 6-1 —

¢ It can also handle networks in which

e The OpenStack software toolset, which assi

a standard, non-OpenFlow switch connects a

collection of OpenFlow-compatible switches. .
’ ists in creating and managing cloyg

computing platforms, is compatible with the Floodlight controller or both private
and public clouds. |

backend for OpenStack using a Neutron

Floodlight can be run as the network ;
h a REST APT that

plugin that exposes a networking-as-a-service model wit
Floodlight offers. |

FloodLight Platform

Itis an Open source SDN controller platform, with following features :

1.

2
3.
4

Apache-licensed
OpenFlow protocol -
Java based

Enterprise class controller .

Application tier

p ERP
. Virtual) [Circuit p F ip
switch |; pusher{) — - — More floodlight applications

td x

Control plane tier |

OpenFlow
hypervisor OpenFlow
switches physical

switches

Fig. 6.4.1: FloodLight overview °

TECHNICAL PUBLICA Tions® ~ an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 97 =====

Software Defined Networks ' 6.97 . SDN Use Cases

Basic functionality

1.

Topology discovery
¢ LLDP protocol

2. Flow installation/deletion -

¢ Install/modify/delete a flow on a switch —

¢ Flow is defined as all packets with the same match.

3. Stats query

e Packet counts
¢ Flow counts

¢ Port stats query “Etc.

Bandwidth Calendaring (BWC)

A better use of network resources is made possible by new services made possible by
software defined networking. A common example of this is bandwidth calendaring
(BWC), which uses information about future traffic to best pack the developing needs
over the network. . ——

To investigate a typical BWC scenario in which a network operator must provide
bandwidth to meet specified, time-varying needs at the lowest possible cost and within
a predetermined time window. Low complexity. strategies for the breakdown of the
original mixed integer problem into smaller ones by taking use of the issue's structure.
Numerical findings show that the suggested solution methodology is almost optimum
and performs more than 20 % better than conventional techniques based on linear
programming relaxations and randomized rounding. | a
The network architecture of data centers has undergone a significant transformation
because of software-defined networking (SDN). Programmable data planes are offered
by SDN and may be set up from a distant, logically centralized controller. Additionally,
carrier network operators and Internet service providers may be able to utilise their
network resources more effectively thanks to the great flexibility and teprogramming
ability of SDN infrastructures. .

In the long run, this would allow for new access services like Bandwidth Calendaring
(BWC), which entails allocating network resources for sizable future bandwidth
bookings. Wide Area Networks (WAN) are essential for the functioning of businesses
and Over-The-Top (OTT) service providers. To prevent congestion, this network must .

0) } ;
TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 98 =====

Software Defined Networks - 6-12.
ES

currently be over-provisioned in accordance with anticipated peak traffic, Businesses
may now dynamically modify connections in accordance with their demands thank, to

SDN.

e Currently, in order to minimize congestion, this network must be over-provisioned in
accordance with the anticipated peak demand. With the help of SDN, businesses may
now dynamically change connections to suit their needs. They are therefore Solely

-Tesponsible for paying for the network resources they actually utilize. The broad
adoption of such services is hampered by the absence of automated procedures that
. accommodate time-varying bandwidth requirements. |

¢ Reservations for bandwidth may be divided into two groups, generally speaking.
Unpredictable bandwidth needs that are much less than the available capacity make up
the first group. They often happen when a consumer encounters an unforeseen spike in
traffic. The second category is the outcome of huge data tranéfers, which often take up
a significant portion of the network's capacity over a.prolonged period of time.

om fate pee toe ee om ne ge a

ON ee Oe me a ee ew nee Oe ee Ck wn Ma ok a coe me Oe te a oe ee ee ee ee en ee “ ~~.

ay
f . {
H . Band |
i ; .
; Request 4 width ;
H . i
.
: 4
{ ?
I o4
4q Band
| Request n width
; i
i i
i- H
} i
sy !

—_ ow oe oe me me cme ee ee eee ee ne ae as ee me om te ee ee ten on ee
- me mec ee ae ee

Fig. 6.5.1 : A’ Bandwidth calendar

« Many of these criteria may tolerate delays, Asa result, the associated bandwidth
reservations are flexible and may be arranged at any moment throughout a
predetermined time window. The beginning time of each bandwidth request must be
determined using the calendar of requests shown in Fig. 6.5.1 and traffic engineering
tunnels must be set up to suit their variable bandwidth needs. :

_® In this essay, we discuss the challenge a network operator has when deciding how to

schedule and route requests in order to reduce network costs over a predetermined ,

_ time frame. If the available network resources are insufficient, then aim to maximize

the traffic accepted volume.

| TECHNICAL PUBLICA TIONS |

~ 4N up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 99 =====

Software Defined Networks 6 - 13 : SDN Use Cases

(66) (6) Data Center Orchestration

¢ Data center orchestration is a process-driven workflow that will, help to make data

centers more well-organized. Repetitive, slow and error-prone manual tasks are
replaced by the automation of tasks and the orchestration of processes. .

(2a

Multi-cloud Data center

Data center orchestration

00.0.8,
OLY?
Seroore

reate’

OO

0,00,
XS

SOR
e!

IT admins

B25

On-prem servers Containers

“Confi guration Performance Load . Security
balancing scaling policies

Automation

Fig. 6.6.1 : Data center orchestration

Fig. 6.6.1 Shows the process of data center orchestration. The automation of tasks is
used by data centre orchestration software to carry out procedures, such installing new
servers. An agile DevOps strategy is made possible by automation systems that
organize data centre operations, allowing for continuous application enhancement.

Think about a band's vocalists or instruments. Similar to. how software defined
programmes each have a distinct purpose, each has its unique sound. But when they

blend nicely, a distinctive sound is created.

The concept of orchestration describes how many activities might be combined to serve
a bigger goal. It produces a highly functional and responsive data centre by organizing
all the duties of numerous services.

The data centre is under increasing strain as a result of the enormous volume of data

moving to cloud computing. A centrally managed data centre is required.

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 100 =====

6 -14 SDN Use Cases

[GG] Advantages of Data Center Orchestration Systems |

¢ Systems for orchestrating data centres automate the setup of computing, storage ang
L2-L7 network services for real, virtual and hybrid networks. Deployment of new apps
may happen fast.
Data centre orchestration solutions provide the following advantages :

1.
2.

Streamlined creation of resources in the public and private clouds.

A shorter time lag exists between a business demand and the point at which the
infrastructure can provide it.

. The IT department has less time to deliver a domain-specific environment.

A framework for controlling data transferred between a business process and
application is provided by data centre orchestration systems.

They employ the following capabilities ; ;

Woe WwW NP

Tracking and publishing APIs for automatic updates of metadata management.
Updating policy enforcement and providing alerts for corrupted data.
Integrating data services with cloud services. |

Scheduling and coordination of data services.

Leveraging of distributed data repository for large data sets.

[(8G2] Data Center Orchestration Tools

-¢ Popular data centre orchestration and automation solutions for data centre and cloud
settings include the ones listed below :

ce)

ro)

and re-configure newly deployed machines, Has

Chef -. Uses a ‘client-server architecture and: is based on Ruby. Presents the
infrastructure as a code.

Docker - Features isolated containers, which allows the execution of many
applications on one server,

Puppet - Built with Ruby and uses an agent/primary architecture. Created to
automate tasks for system administrators, .

Ansible - An agentless configuration management tool. Created to push changes

an ecosystem conducive for
writing custom apps. The platform i ls written in Python and allows users to script

commands in YAML.

Vagrant - Helps build, configure and nana
environments. Lets every member of the IT t
environments.

8¢ lightweight -virtual machine
eam have identical development

TECHNICAL PUBLICA Tions® ~ 4n up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner

===== Page 101 =====

Software Defined Nehvoms 6-15 ‘Uses Ss

Review Questions with Answers

1. Explain Juniper SDN framecork. (Refer section 6.1)

2. Explain IETF Internet Engineering Task Force) SDM Savciccre (Refer section 6.2)

3. Explain Open Daylight (ODL) contreller. (Refer section 6.3)

tae ene? oe |
4. Explain Open Daylight (ODL) architecture. (Refer section 6.3.1) Marks6
5. Explain flocdligitt controller (Refer section 6.4) Marks)
6. Explain salient features of floodlight controller. (Refer section 6.4.1) Warks6
7. Explain bandwidth calendaring (BVVC) . (Refer section 6.5) (Marks 6
8. Explain data center orctestration. (Refer section 6.6)
9. Explain advantages of data center orcizestration systems (Refer section 6.6.1) |

10. Explain data center orchestration tools. (Refer section 6.6.2)

oo

TECHNICAL PUBLICATIONS © - an up-thrust for knowledge

Scanned with CamScanner
